Full text of "A voyage round Great Britain, undertaken in the summer of the year 1813, and commencing from the Land's-End, Cornwall, by Richard Ayton"
See other formats
A  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN 


ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN 

UNDERTAKEN  BETWEEN  THE  YEARS  1813  AND  1823 

AND  COMMENCING  FROM  THE  LAND'S  END,  CORNWALL 

BY  RICHARD  AYTON 
AND  WILLIAM  DANIELL 

WITH 

A     SERIES     OF     VIEWS 
3lto£tratibe  of  tlje  Character  anb  prominent  Jfeature^  of  tfje  Coasft 

DRAWN  AND  ENGRAVED 
BY  WILLIAM  DANIELL   R.A. 


Volume  I 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  THE  TATE  GALLERY,  MILLBANK 
AND  THE  SCOLAR  PRESS,  39  GREAT  RUSSELL  STREET 

1978 


Published  jointly  by 

the  Publications  Department,  the  Tate  Gallery 

and  the  Scolar  Press 

ISBN  0  85967  472  x 


Printed  in  England  by  The  Scolar  Press,  Ilkley 


JL  HE  eminence  of  A  Voyage  Round  Great  Britain  as  a  peak  among  the  towering 
range  of  English  topographical  books  with  aquatints  published  in  the  early  part 
of  the  19th  century  has  long  been  acknowledged.  William  Daniell's  plan  to  follow 
the  western  and  northern  coasts  from  Lands  End  to  John  O' Groats  and  to  return 
via  the  east  and  southern  coasts  and  to  illustrate  'prominent  features'  with  'a 
series  of  views'  was  ambitious  in  concept  and,  by  any  standards,  splendid  in 
achievement.  No  less  remarkable,  it  was  actually  carried  out.  Between  1814  and  1825, 
to  begin  with  in  parts,  latterly  in  volumes,  an  imposing  sequence  of  folios  provided 
subscribers  with  no  less  than  308  plates  engraved  in  aquatint  and  hand  coloured 
together  with  more  than  800  pages  of  descriptive  narrative. 

The  illustrations  are  widely  known  through  having  been  prime  objects  of  the 
breakers'  attentions.  Removed  from  the  volumes  in  which  they  were  originally 
issued  they  have  long  provided  a  ready  source  of  attractive  and  undemanding  views, 
often  with  great  associative  appeal.  The  process  of  dismemberment  has  usually 
meant  that  the  accompanying  text  has  been  discarded  and  that  copies  of  The  Voyage 
as  published  have  become  increasingly  scarce,  expensive  and  nowadays  mostly 
accessible  only  in  libraries.  This,  together  with  the  fact  that  the  large  format  of  the 
original  volumes  hardly  lends  itself  to  easy  reading,  has  meant  that  the  narrative  is 
virtually  unknown.  With  most  books  of  this  kind  such  lack  is  scarcely  grievous.  But 
in  the  case  of  A  Voyage  Round  Great  Britain  the  loss  of  the  text  of  the  first  two  volumes 
-  which  forms  more  than  half  the  total  -  is  of  a  lively,  individual,  distinctive  and 
perceptive  account  of  a  journey  which  from  a  topographical  point  of  view  remains 
surprisingly  recognisable,  but  which,  in  the  description  of  the  conditions  and  cir- 
cumstances of  the  people  and  places  encountered  records  another,  often  picturesque, 
but  not  notably  preferable  world. 

The  portion  of  the  voyage  from  Lands  End  to  Kirkudbright  was  jointly  under- 
taken by  William  Daniell  and  Richard  Ay  ton  in  the  summers  of  1813  and  1814. 
Ay  ton  was  27  years  of  age  with  no  established  career  behind,  or  ahead,  of  him: 


vi  FOREWORD 

Daniell,  Associate  of  the  Royal  Academy  and  aspiring  to  full  election,  had  at  44 
already  spent  more  years  in  topographic  journey  ings  than  his  companion  had  lived. 
The  venture  was  instigated  by  Daniell,  though  Ayton,  whose  name  appears  first 
on  the  title  page  of  Volumes  I  and  II,  clearly  saw  himself  in  no  secondary  role.  'I  must 
premise,'  he  remarks  on  the  first  page  of  his  narrative,  'that  Mr  William  Daniell,  by 
whom  the  illustrations  of  this  work  were  drawn  and  engraved,  was  my  companion 
during  the  whole  voyage,  and  that  the  magisterial  monosyllable,  we,  which  occurs  so 
often  in  the  narrative,  has  nothing  of  arrogance  about  it,  but  includes  on  all  occasions 
both  myself  and  my  friend.'  Inevitably,  the  companionship  did  not  last  the  course. 
The  temperaments  of  the  two  travellers  were  diverse.  Their  interests  were  different 
and  one  may  suspect  that  to  Ayton  one  lighthouse  looked  much  like  another  -  a  fact 
that  even  Daniell's  pencil  does  not  altogether  disguise.  The  writer  was  more  foot- 
loose; the  range  of  his  subjects  wider;  and  increasingly,  in  spite  of  his  strong  ties  with 
the  sea  and  sailing  (affiliations  which  may  well  have  commended  Ayton  to  Daniell 
as  co-navigator),  Ayton's  concern  is  with  the  customs  and  beliefs,  the  attitudes  and 
social  conditions  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns,  villages  and  countryside  through 
which  he  travelled. 

'The  character  of  Mr  Ayton's  mind  was  vigorous;  that  of  his  disposition  was 
enthusiasm,'  his  anonymous  memorialist  was  to  write  in  1825.  'Upon  every  subject, 
even  the  most  trivial,  he  thought  strongly,  and  felt  deeply.  This  might,  perhaps,  have 
given  both  to  his  writings  and  conversation  a  tone  of  exaggeration;  but  it  also 
bestowed  upon  them  a  liveliness  and  force  which  compelled  notice,  and  generally 
drew  admiration.  It  is  impossible  to  read  a  sentence  . . .  without  being  struck  with  the 
originality  of  the  conceptions  and  energy  of  the  language.'  He  did  not  like  all  that  he 
saw.  Nor  did  he  approve.  The  Welsh  were  often  primitive  and  filthy,  and  where 
touched  by  industrialism,  depraved.  Methodism  was  an  abomination  and  its  effects 
morally  dubious.  Inns  more  often  than  not  were  full  and  usually  horrid,  with  atro- 
cious food  and  rapacious  landlords.  But  prejudice  is  tempered  with  wit  and  distaste 
expressed  with  a  manly  disdain  reminiscent  of  and  perhaps  modelled  on  Byron.  He 
responds  genuinely  and  generously  to  scenery  and  his  excursions  into  antiquarianism 
and  history  are  related  in  an  easy  manner,  with  an  eye  for  the  improbable  and  the 
comic. 

But  his  underlying  concern  is  with  people  and  the  social  condition.  For  Ayton  a 
lighthouse  is  less  an  artifact  than  an  occasion  to  wonder  at  the  economic  and  human 
forces  that  cause  men  to  choose  to  live  the  life  of  keepers.  His  descent  of  a  coal  mine 
at  Whitehaven  gives  rise  to  an  extended  piece  of  writing  where  factual  description 
is  heightened  by  a  passionate  sense  of  human  outrage  to  form  a  document  of  social 
protest  far  in  advance  of  its  time  and  still  moving  in  its  effect.  The  connection  of  such 
writing  with  Daniell's  purpose  in  embarking  on  the  Voyage  must  have  seemed 


FOREWORD  Vll 

increasingly  tenuous,  even  harmful.  The  excursion  into  the  mine  causes  Ayton  to 
surmise  that  'The  cries  of  the  little  beings  condemned  to  the  mines  have  never,  I 
imagine,  reached  the  ears  of  their  noble  proprietor;  and  if  he  should  hear  of  their 
condition  through  my  means,  and  secure  their  release,  I  shall  have  been  accessory  to 
an  act  of  charity  that  I  shall  remember  with  pleasure  through  life.'  If  the  eyes  of  the 
same  'noble  proprietor'  and  others  like  him  were  precisely  what  Daniell  needed  to 
catch  in  order  to  support  his  venture,  his  interests  were  not  likely  to  be  furthered  by 
Ayton's  egregious  foisting  of  social  questions  onto  a  visual  record  firmly  based  on  the 
aesthetics  of  the  picturesque.  In  Daniell's  views  and,  doubtless,  in  the  minds  of  the 
majority  of  his  audience,  mankind  was  to  be  seen  either  as  the  agent  of  natural 
improvement  or  simply  as  a  pictorial  component  of  the  scene. 

There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  any  violent  falling  out  between  Ayton  and 
Daniell:  but  the  correspondence  between  plates  and  text  becomes  increasingly 
uncertain  as  the  travellers  progressed  in  the  late  summer  of  1814  along  the  west 
coast  of  northern  England.  Volume  II,  and  with  it  Ayton's  collaboration,  ends  as  the 
Voyage  approached  the  coasts  and  islands  which,  it  may  be  surmised,  Daniell  found 
most  congenial  to  his  eyes  and  which  were  to  provide  him  with  the  subjects  which 
set  the  seal  on  his  reputation. 

In  the  following  year  1815,  Daniell  continued  his  journey  alone.  In  a  long  summer 
of  intensive  work  he  accumulated  drawings  and  notes  which  provided  him  with  the 
raw  material  for  the  next  three  volumes.  After  an  interval  of  three  years  publication 
of  the  Voyage  recommenced  in  1818,  but  now  with  more  plates  to  each  volume  and 
much  shorter  accompanying  texts.  These  were  written  by  Daniell  himself.  Compared 
with  Ayton's  they  are  pedestrian  in  style  and  generally  commonplace  in  observation. 
But  they  provide  a  by  no  means  uninteresting  appendage  to  the  250  and  more  plates 
which  they  accompany.  They  give  indications  of  how  he  worked  and  throw  light  on 
the  relationship  between  such  an  artist  and  the  society  whose  needs  he  fed  and  who, 
in  turn,  supported  him.  At  the  very  least,  the  compilation  and  writing  of  this  extensive 
commentary  -  done  concurrently  with  the  autographic  engraving  and  etching  in  a 
notably  difficult  medium  of  the  plates  themselves  -  attests  the  determination  and  the 
sheer  professionalism  with  which  Daniell  pursued  his  task. 

From  his  narrative  emerge  glimpses  of  those  aspects  of  landscape,  history  and 
society  which  aroused  some  deeper  response  in  a  personality  who  remains  elusive  and 
whose  art  is  concerned  principally  with  description  and  with  capturing  with  appar- 
ently deceptive  ease  the  'sense  of  place'  but  in  which  comment  is  at  most  implied  - 
and  usually  anodyne. 

After  a  break  from  travel  of  six  years,  three  more  tours  in  the  late  summers  of 
1821,  1822  and  1823  completed  Daniell's  circumnavigation  of  Great  Britain.  On 
September  the  14th  1823,  ten  years  after  he  and  Ayton  had  set  out  from  it,  he  again 


Vlll  FOREWORD 

reached  the  Lands  End.  The  event  coincided  to  within  days  with  Ayton's  death  at 
the  age  of  37  and  there  is  some  irony  in  contrasting  his  jaunty  opening  to  Volume  I: 
'The  difficulty  of  making  a  beginning  has  been  felt  by  many  adventurers,  who  when 
this  essential  part  of  an  undertaking  has  been  surmounted,  have  been  able  to  pursue 
and  bring  it  to  a  conclusion  without  hesitation  and  delay  .  .  .  some  little  stammering 
. . .  may  perhaps  be  granted  to  the  diffident . . .  though  I  believe  . . .  that  in  all  arduous 
cases  of  speech  or  action  ...  it  is  best  to  begin  at  once',  with  the  survivor's  sigh  of 
relief,  audible  in  the  words  with  which  Daniell  begins  Volume  VIII.  'In  bringing  to 
its  close  an  undertaking  of  much  toil  and  some  hazard,  a  feeling  of  satisfaction  arises 
which  is  presumed,  no  reader  can  require  to  be  described.' 

If  the  note  of  self-satisfaction  requires  no  indulgence  in  the  face  of  so  monumental 
an  achievement,  it  in  no  way  detracts  from  the  accomplishment  to  suggest  that 
appreciation  of  it  may  be  even  further  enriched  by  enjoyment  of  the  words,  and 
especially  those  of  his  fellow  voyager,  which  originally  accompanied  Daniell's 
masterwork.  It  is  a  purpose  of  the  present  edition,  issued  in  conjunction  with  the 
publication  by  the  Tate  Gallery  of  new  impressions  of  the  plates,  to  make  this  more 
feasible  than  previously.  The  narratives  are  reproduced  without  change,  but  reduced 
in  size,  from  the  original  printing  and  the  reproductions,  also  reduced  in  size,  of 
Daniell's  views  have  been  interspersed  as  proximately  as  possible  to  the  relevant 
texts. 


RICHARD  AYTON 

From  the  engraving  by  F.  C.  Lewis  from  a  drawing  by  R.  Westall 


«*-»•,. 


1 


- 


WILLIAM  DANIELL  by  R.  Westall 
From  the  drawing  in  the  collection  of  The  Royal  Academy 


INDEX  TO  THE  SUBJECTS  ENGRAVED 

Volumes  I-III  of  the  original  publication  form  the  first  volume  of  the  present 
edition.  Volumes  IV-VIII  comprise  the  second  volume.  The  pagination  of  the 
original  volumes  has  been  retained.  The  numbers  in  the  following  index  refer  to 
the  page  within  the  original  Volumes  I-VIII  which  immediately  precedes  the 
engraving  of  the  subject. 


VOLUME    I 

The  Lands-end,  Cornwall  6 

The  long-ships  lighthouse  off  the 
lands  end,  Cornwall  6 

The  entrance  to  Portreath, 
Cornwall  18 

Boscastle  Pier  on  the  coast  of 
Cornwall  18 

Hartland  pier  North  Devon  34 

Clovelly  on  the  Coast  of  North 
Devon  34 

Ilfracombe,  Coast  of  North  Devon      48 
View  of  Ilfracombe,  from 
Hilsborough  48 

Near  Combmartin,  on  the  coast  of 
North  Devon  50 

Lynmouth,  on  the  coast  of  North 
Devon  50 

St.  Donats,  Glamorganshire  64 

Britton  Ferry,  Glamorganshire  64 

The  Mumbles  light-house,  in 
Swansea  Bay  72 

The  Worms-head,  in  Tenby  bay  72 

Tenby,  Pembrokeshire  80 

The  Eligug-stack,  near  St. 
Gowanshead,  Pembrokeshire  80 

Solva,  near  St.  Davids, 
Pembrokeshire  112 

View  of  the  entrance  to  Fishguard, 
near  Goodwych  sands  112 

Goodwych  Pier,  near  Fishguard, 
Pembrokeshire  128 


View  near  Aberystwith, 
Cardiganshire  128 

Barmouth,  Merionethshire  154 

View  of  Caernarvon  Castle,  from 
Anglesea  154 

The  Harbour  light-house,  Holyhead  200 
Light-house  on  the  South  Stack, 
Holyhead  200 

Part  of  the  South  Stack,  Holyhead    204 
The  Rope  Bridge,  near  the 
Lighthouse,  Holyhead  204 

VOLUME    II 

Black  Marble  Quarry,  near  red 
wharf  bay,  Anglesea  10 

The  entrance  to  Amlwch  harbour 
Anglesea  10 

Red  Wharf  Bay,  Anglesea  20 

Beaumaris  Castle,  Anglesea  20 

View  of  Puffin  Island,  near 
Anglesea  32 

The  Bath,  built  by  Lord  Penryn, 
near  Bangor,  N.  Wales  32 

Penman-maur,  taken  from  near 
Aber,  N.  Wales  42 

View  of  Conway  Castle, 
Caernarvonshire  42 

The  Light-house  on  Point  of  Air, 
Flintshire  60 

View  near  Hoyle-lake,  Cheshire  60 

The  Towns-end  Mill,  Liverpool  80 

Seacombe  Ferry,  Liverpool  80 


Xll 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


Liverpool,  taken  from  the  opposite 

side  of  the  River  98 

Lancaster  Castle  98 
View  near  Lower  Heysham, 

Lancashire  114 
Distant  View  of  Whitbarrow  Scar, 

Westmorland  114 

Castle-head,  Westmorland  126 

Peel  Castle,  Lancashire  126 

Whiteheaven,  Cumberland  150 
Harrington,  near  Whitehaven, 

Cumberland  150 

Mary  Port,  Cumberland  166 

Carlaverock  Castle,  Dumfrieshire  166 

Kirkcudbright  208 

The  Mull  of  Galloway,  Wigtonshire  208 

Port  Patrick,  Wigtonshire  214 
Cardness  Castle,  near  Gatehouse, 

Kirkcudbrightshire  214 

Near  Carsleith,  Galloway  220 

Wigton,  Galloway  220 

Cree-town,  Kirkcudbrightshire  222 
Dunsky  Castle,  near  Port  Patrick, 

Wigtonshire  222 


VOLUME    III 

The  Crag  of  Ailsa  6 

Culzean  Castle,  Ayrshire  6 

Distant  View  of  Ayr  8 

Pier  at  Ardrossan,  Ayrshire  8 
The  Isle  of  Arran,  taken  near 

Ardrossan  12 

Ardgowan,  Renfrewshire  12 

Greenock,  on  the  Clyde  16 
Steam  Boat  on  the  Clyde  near 

Dumbarton  16 

Mount  Stuart,  Isle  of  Bute  20 


Loch  Ranza,  Isle  of  Arran  20 
Duntrune  Castle,  Loch  Creran, 

Argylshire  22 

Loch  Swene,  Argylshire  22 
Rassella,  near  Kilmartin,  Loch 

Creaan,  Argylshire  24 

On  the  Isle  of  Jura  24 

Inverary  Castle,  Argyleshire  28 
Dunolly  Castle,  near  Oban, 

Argylshire  28 

Dunstaffnage  Castle,  Argylshire  32 
Clam-shell  Cave,  Staffa,  lona  in 

the  distance  32 

Exterior  of  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa  38 

Entrance  to  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa  38 

In  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa  40 

Staffa,  near  Fingal's  Cave  40 

The  Cormorants  Cave,  Staffa  42 

View  from  the  Island  of  Staffa  42 

The  Island  of  Staffa  from  the  East  46 
The  Island  of  Staffa,  from  the 

South  West  46 

View  of  lona,  from  the  N.  East  50 

The  Cathedral  at  lona  50 
View  of  Ben-more  from  near  Ulva 

house  58 
Remains  of  the  Chapel  &c  on 

Inch  Kenneth  58 

Gribune-head  in  Mull  62 

Loch-na-gael,  near  Knock  on  Mull  62 
Distant  View  of  Cruachan-ben, 

taken  near  Arros  bridge,  Isle  of  Mull  64 

Arros  Castle,  Isle  of  Mull  64 

Tobermory,  on  the  Isle  of  Mull  70 

Mingarry  Castle,  Argylshire  70 

Ardnamurchan  point,  Argylshire  74 

Scoor  Eig  on  the  Isle  of  Eig  74 

Part  of  the  Isle  of  Rum  76 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


Xlll 


Armidal,  the  Seat  of  Lord 

Macdonald,  Isle  of  Skye  76 

Iloransay,  Isle  of  Skye  78 
Balmacarro-house,  Loch-alsh, 

Ross-shire  78 

VOLUME    IV 

Castle  Ellen-Donan  2 

Loch-Duich,  Ross-shire  2 
Ilan-dreoch,  Glenbeg,  Inverness-shire  6 
The  bay  of  Barrisdale  in  Loch 

Hourne  6 

Loch  Hourne  head  12 

Glen-coe  taken  near  Ballachulish  12 

Near  Kylakin,  Skye  16 

Liveras,  near  Broadford,  Skye  16 

Portree  on  the  Isle  of  Skye  20 
Glenvargle  bridge,  near  Portree, 

Skye  20 

Duntulm,  Isle  of  Skye  24 

Dunvegan  Castle,  Isle  of  Skye  24 

Dunvegan  Castle  30 
Little  Brieshmeal,  near  Talisker,Skye  30 

Loch  Scavig,  Skye  34 

Loch  Coruisq  near  Loch  Scavig  34 

The  Coolin,  taken  from  Loch  Slapin  40 
From  the  Isle  of  Rassay,  looking 

Westward  40 

Castle  Broichin  on  the  Isle  of  Rassay  46 

Rowadill  in  Harris  46 
Light  House  on  the  Isle  of  Scalpa, 

Harris  52 
Part  of  the  Northern  face  of  one  of 

the  Shiant  Isles  52 

Near  View  of  one  of  the  Shiant  Isles  56 

Stornaway,  on  the  Isle  of  Lewis  56 
Remains  of  a  Temple  at  Galston 

Isle  of  Lewis  62 


Druidical  Stone  at  Strather  near 

Barvas,  Isle  of  Lewis  62 

The  Gair-loch,  Ross-shire  66 

Gair-loch  head,  Ross-shire  66 

Creen-stone  rock,  Loch  Broom  72 

Pier  at  Tanera,  Loch  Broom  72 

Ben  Sulvheim,  from  Loch  Inver  74 

View  of  Cuniag,  from  Loch  Inver  74 

Unapool  in  Kyles-cu  Assynt  80 

Rispand  Durness  80 

Entrance  to  the  cave  of  Smowe  84 

Whiten-head,  Loch  Eribol  84 

Bay  of  Tongue  90 

Strath-naver,  Sutherlandshire  90 

The  Clett-rock,  Holborn  head  92 

Thurso,  from  near  Holborn  head  92 

Castle  Sinclair,  Thurso  94 

Castle  Hill,  near  Thurso  94 


VOLUME  v 

Mey  Castle,  Caithness  facing  1 

The  Ferry  at  Scarskerry, 
Caithness  facing  I 

Near  the  Berry-head  Hoy,  Orkney        4 
The  Snook  Hoy,  Orkney  4 

The  Old  Man  of  Hoy  8 

Stromness,  Orkney  8 

Stones  of  Stennis,  Orkney  12 

The  Cathedral  of  St.  Magnus, 
Kirk  wall,  Orkney  12 

S.E.  View  of  the  Cathedral  & 
Palace  at  Kirkwall,  Orkney  14 

Kirk  wall,  Orkney,  from  the  Bay          14 
N.  West  View  of  the  Cathedral, 
Kirkwall 


Tower  of  the  Bishops  Palace, 
Kirkwall 


14 


14 


XIV 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


Remains  of  the  Earls  Palace, 

Kirkwall  16 
Light  House  on  the  Start,  Isle  of 

Sandy,  Orkney  16 

John  o'  Groats,  Caithness  18 

Duncansby  stacks,  Caithness  18 

Keiss  Castle,  Caithness  18 

Ackergill  Tower,  Caithness  18 
Castles  Sinclair  &  Girnigo, 

Caithness  20 

Wick,  Caithness  20 

Old  Wick  Castle,  Caithness  20 
The  Stack  at  Hempriggs,  Caithness  20 

Scene  at  Hempriggs,  Caithness  20 

Forse  Castle,  Sutherland  20 

Dunbeath  Castle,  Caithness  20 

Berrydale,  Caithness  20 

Castle  of  Berrydale  22 

Helmsdale,  Sutherlandshire  22 
Dunrobin  Castle,  Sutherlandshire  24 
Dunrobin  Castle  from  the  N.E., 

Sutherlandshire  24 

Dornoch,  Sutherlandshire  26 

Bonar  Bridge  26 

Cromarty  28 

Pier  at  Fortrose,  Ross-shire  28 

Inverness  30 

Nairn  30 

Obelisk  at  Forres  32 

Nelson's  Tower,  Forres  32 

Brugh-head,  Murrayshire  34 

Coxtown  Tower,  near  Elgin  34 

Finlater  Castle,  Banffshire  34 

Boyne  Castle,  Banffshire  34 


VOLUME    VI 

Duff  House,  Banff 
Banff 


Frazerburgh,  Aberdeenshire  4 

Kinnaird  Head,  Aberdeenshire  4 

Peterhead,  Aberdeenshire  6 

Slanes  Castle,  Aberdeenshire  6 

Bridge  of  Old  Don,  Old  Aberdeen  8 

Aberdeen  8 

Dunotter  Castle,  Kincardinshire  12 

Inverbernie  Bridge  12 

Montrose,  Forfarshire  14 

Broughty  Castle,  Forfarshire  14 

Dundee,  Forfarshire  18 

St.  Andrews,  Fifeshire  18 

Wemys  Castle,  Fifeshire  24 
Distant  View  of  Edinburgh  with 

Wemys  Castle  24 

Edinburgh  from  Calton  Hill  30 
Edinburgh  with  part  of  the  North 

Bridge  &  Castle  30 

Edinburgh  from  the  Castle  36 

Leith  36 

Tantallon  Castle,  Haddingtonshire  38 

The  Bass  Rock  38 

Dunbar,  Haddingtonshire  42 

Berwick  upon  Tweed  42 
Castle  on  Holy  Island, 

Northumberland  46 
Bamborough  Castle, 

Northumberland  46 

North  Shields,  Northumberland  54 

Tynemouth,  Northumberland  54 

Sunderland  Pier,  Durham  58 

Whitby,  Yorkshire  58 

Whitby  Abbey,  Yorkshire  64 

Scarborough,  Yorkshire  64 
Light-house  on  Flamboro'  Head, 

Yorkshire  72 

Hull,  Yorkshire  72 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


XV 


Boston,  Lincolnshire  76 

Yarmouth  from  Gorlstone  76 

Lowestoft,  Suffolk  84 

Southwold,  Suffolk  84 
The  Orford  Ness  Light  houses, 

Suffolk  90 

Harwich,  Essex  90 

Mistley  near  Harwich,  Essex  92 

South  End,  Essex  92 

VOLUME    VII 

Sheerness  2 

The  Reculvers  2 

Pier  at  Margate  6 

North  Foreland  Light  House  6 

Broadstairs  8 

Ramsgate  8 

Deal  Castle  16 

Walmer  Castle  16 

Dover  Castle  22 

Dover  from  Shakespears  Cliff  22 

Shakespears  Cliff  30 

Folkestone,  Kent  30 

Hythe  34 

Dungeness  Light  House  34 

Rye,  Sussex  38 

Winchelsea  38 
Hastings  from  near  the  White 

Rock  42 

Hastings  from  the  East  Cliff  42 

Near  Beachy-head  46 

Brighton  46 

Near  Regents  Square,  Brighton  50 

Ovington  near  Brighton  50 

Shoreham  54 

Pier  at  Littlehampton  54 

View  from  the  Park,  Arundel  58 


Bognor  58 

View  from  Portsdown  Hill  64 

West  Cowes  64 

Lord  Henry  Seymour's  Castle  68 

Mr.  Nash's  House  68 

Ryde  72 

Brading  Harbour  72 

Shanklin  Chine  74 

Freshwater  Bay,  Isle  of  Wight  74 
Needles  Cliff  &  Needles,  Isle  of 

Wight  78 
Distant  View  of  the  Needles  & 

Hurst  Castle  78 

Christchurch  80 

Poole  Harbour  80 

Corfe  Castle  84 

Swanage  84 

Lulworth  Cove  86 

Weymouth  86 

VOLUME    VIII 

Light-house,  Isle  of  Portland  2 

St.  Catherine's  Chapel,  Dorset  2 

Bridport  Harbour,  Dorset  6 
Lyme  Regis,  from  Charmouth, 

Dorset  6 

Exmouth,  Devon  10 

Sidmouth,  Devon  10 

Teignmouth,  Devon  12 

Babicome,  Devon  12 

Torbay,  Devon  16 

Tor-abbey,  Devon  16 

Tor-quay,  Devon  18 

Brixham,  Torbay,  Devon  18 

Entrance  to  Dartmouth,  Devon  22 
The  Junction  of  the  Dart  with  the 

Sea  22 


XVI 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS 


Near  Kingswear,  on  the  Dart, 
Devon 

Kingswear,  Devon 
Salcombe,  Devon 


22 
22 

26 
26 


Bovisand,  near  Plymouth 
Quay  at  Straddon  point,  near 

Plymouth  30 

The  Citadel,  Plymouth  30 
Catwater,  Plymouth,  from  the 

Citadel  30 
Mount  Edgecumbe  from  the  Citadel 

Plymouth  30 

View  from  Mount  Edgecumbe  34 
Mamoaze  from  Mount  Edgecumbe       34 

Port  Wrinkle,  Cornwall  40 

East  Looe,  Cornwall  40 

Polperro,  Cornwall  42 


Fowey  from  Bodenick,  Cornwall  42 

Fowey  Castle,  Cornwall  44 

Polkerris,  Cornwall  44 

Mevagissy,  Cornwall  48 

Mevagissy,  Cornwall  48 

Gorran  Haven,  Cornwall  50 

Port-looe,  Cornwall  50 

Falmouth,  Cornwall  54 
The  Lizard,  Light-houses,  Cornwall    54 

Mullyan  Cove,  Cornwall  56 

Near  Mullyan  Cove,  Cornwall  56 

St.  Michaels  Mount,  Cornwall  60 

St.  Michaels  Mount,  Cornwall  60 

Penzance,  Cornwall  62 

The  Land's  end,  Cornwall  62 


VOYAGE 
ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN, 

UNDERTAKEN  IN  THE  SUMMER  OF  THE  YEAR  1813, 

AND  COMMENCING  FROM  THE  LAND'S-END,  CORNWALL, 
BY  RICHARD  AYTON. 


WITH 


A   SERIES    OF    VIEWS, 

3fllustrattoe  of  tf)e  Character  anti  prominent  ^features  of  tfie  Coast, 


DRAWN  AND  ENGRAVED 


BY  WILLIAM  DANIELL,  A.R.A. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED    FOR   LONGMAN,   HURST,   REES,    ORME,   AND    BROWN,   PATERNOSTER-ROW; 
AND  WILLIAM  DANIELL,  NO.  9,  CLEVELAND-STREET,  FITZROY-SQUARE. 

1814. 


T.   DA  \  ISDN,  Lmnl.anl  slri-i't, 

Wbitefrian,  London. 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  inland  counties  of  England  have  been  so  hackneyed  by 
travellers  and  quartos,  the  Coast  has  hitherto  been  most  unaccountably 
neglected,  and,  if  we  except  a  few  fashionable  watering-places,  is  entirely 
unknown  to  the  public.  Those  parts  which  are  frequented  for  the  pur- 
pose of  sea-bathing,  are  chosen  where  the  shore  is  flat  and  convenient 
for  bathers  and  bathing-machines ;  where  the  country  is  divided  into 
smooth  paths  for  ladies  to  walk  on,  and  safe  roads  for  gentlemen  to  ride 
on ;  ruggedness  and  sublimity,  features  for  which  coast  scenery  is  most 
to  be  admired,  would  be  subversive  of  the  objects  for  which  these  places 
are  visited.  But  many,  who  would  not  venture  in  pursuit  of  amusement 
out  of  the  latitude  of  good  inns  and  level  roads,  to  make  paths  for  them- 
selves over  rocks  and  crags,  may  still  be  pleased  to  become  acquainted, 
at  a  cheaper  rate,  with  the  character  of  their  own  shores,  where  most 
conspicuous  for  boldness  and  picturesque  beauty.  It  is  the  design,  there- 
fore, of  the  following  voyage,  minutely  to  describe  the  whole  coast  round 
Great  Britain ;  not  merely  to  give  plans  and  outlines  of  its  well-known 
towns,  ports,  and  havens,  but  to  illustrate  the  grandeur  of  its  natural 
scenery,  the  manners  and  employment  of  people,  and  modes  of  life,  in 
its  wildest  parts.  So  many  associations  flattering  to  our  pride  are  con- 
nected with  every  view  of  our  seas  and  shores,  that  it  is  singular  that  so 

much 


IV  INTRODUCTION. 

much  remains  to  be  said  on  such  a  subject,  with  the  recommendation  of 
novelty. 

As  in  this  voyage  the  reader  will  find  two  navigators  frequently  sail- 
ing on  horseback,  and  on  more  than  one  occasion  scudding  in  a  gig,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  explain  the  causes  which  obliged  them  to  prosecute 
their  course  by  means  so  irregular  and  unfamiliar.  When  the  under- 
taking was  first  designed,  the  authors  most  certainly  intended  to  travel 
principally  by  sea,  but,  on  experiment,  the  plan  was  found  to  be  utterly 
impracticable.  As  it  was  their  object  to  examine  every  point,  and  stone, 
and  cranny  of  the  coast,  no  kind  of  boat  was  calculated  for  their  service 
but  a  small  rowing-boat,  as  no  other  could  venture  to  approach  near 
enough  to  the  shore  for  their  purposes.  The  boat  was  easily  to  be  pro- 
cured, but  the  winds  and  waves  were  not  so  tractable  :  rapid  tides, 
ground-swells,  insurmountable  surfs,  strong  winds,  and  foul  winds,  are 
among  the  catalogue  of  horrors  on  the  coast,  which  were  frequently 
all  raging  at  the  same  time,  and  no  one  of  which  could  be  encountered 
with  safety  in  a  small  and  open  boat.  Whenever  any  one  of  these  ob- 
jections was  in  force,  it  was  necessary  to  yield  to  it.  But  luckily,  the 
incompatibility  of  small  boats  and  great  seas  did  not  interfere  with  the 
object  of  this  work;  for,  by  proceeding  along  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  when 
the  sea  was  not  to  be  trusted,  there  was  always  an  opportunity  of 
examining  the  same  points  which  could  have  been  seen  from  the  sea, 
and  likewise  of  exploring  many  little  creeks  and  inlets,  which  form  some 
of  the  most  picturesque  and  interesting  features  of  the  coast,  at  which  a 
boat  could  not  at  any  time  possibly  land,  and  which,  therefore,  in  a  voyage 
more  formally  and  literally  pursued,  must  have  been  passed  unnoticed. 

If 


INTRODUCTION. 


If  the  weather  had  been  always  fine,  and  the  sea  always  smooth,  boats 
would  not  have  been  employed  more  frequently  than  they  have  been  in 
the  course  of  this  circuit.  They  were  serviceable  when  it  was  desired  to 
take  a  view  of  a  long  line  of  coast,  and  to  ascertain  its  general  character 
and  appearance ;  they  were  not  absolutely  necessary  for  any  other  pur- 
pose, and  were  used  on  other  occasions  only  for  the  sake  of  novelty  and 
variety.  As  every  end,  therefore,  which  was  proposed  by  this  work,  has 
been  fully  accomplished,  it  is  conceived  admissible,  in  spite  of  the 
tyranny  of  the  seas,  to  retain  its  original  and  present  title. 

The  voyage  commences  from  the  Land's-End,  and  is  continued  by 
the  north  coast  of  Cornwall. 


VOYAGE 
ROUND  GREAT   BRITAIN,  &c. 


A  HE  difficulty  of  making  a  beginning  has  been  felt  by  many  adventurers,  who,  when  this 
essential  part  of  an  undertaking  has  been  surmounted,  have  been  able  to  pursue  and  bring 
it  to  a  conclusion  without  hesitation  or  delay.  It  is  unnecessary  to  hunt  for  examples, 
for  there  are  few  who  cannot  acknowledge  from  experience,  in  some  trial  of  their  lives, 
how  troublesome  it  is  to  begin.  Some  little  stammering,  and  a  few  preparatory  hems  and 
ha's  may  perhaps  be  granted  to  the  diffident,  though  I  believe  that  they  tend  rather  to 
increase  than  relieve  the  pain  of  the  first  word,  and  that  in  all  arduous  cases  of  speech 
or  action,  which  cannot  be  altogether  avoided,  it  is  best  to  begin  at  once.  I  shall 
adopt  this  plan,  and  as  I  have  a  long  journey  before  me,  shall  not  fatigue  myself  or  my 
reader  by  any  useless  deviations,  nor  expend  one  idle  syllable  by  the  way,  between  London 
and  the  Land's-End.  I  must  premise,  that  Mr.  William  Daniell,  by  whom  the  illustrations 
of  this  work  were  drawn  and  engraved,  was  my  companion  during  the  whole  voyage, 
and  that  the  magisterial  monosyllable,  we,  which  occurs  so  often  in  the  narrative,  has 
nothing  of  arrogance  about  it,  but  includes  on  all  occasions  both  myself  and  my  friend. 

The  promontory  called  the  Land's-End  is  the  most  western  point  of  England.  Why, 
in  an  island,  this  spot  should  be  particularly  styled  the  Land's-End,  I  cannot  determine, 
but  the  title  has  given  it  a  great  degree  of  interest,  and  attracts  crowds  to  it,  who,  without 
pausing  to  examine  the  motives  of  their  curiosity,  gaze  at  it,  scratch  their  names  upon  a 
sod,  and  then  depart,  with  that  fulness  of  satisfaction  which  a  man  ought  to  feel,  who  is 
conscious  that  he  has  done  all  that  can  be  done.  The  Lizard  Point,  which  is  a  few  leagues 
from  it,  is  the  Land's-End  to  the  south ;  but  it  has  no  visitors  on  that  account.  So  much 
is  to  be  effected  by  a  name.  This  western  promontory,  however,  presents  a  very  grand 
and  striking  scene,  and,  independent  of  the  charm  of  its  name,  may  well  repay  the  curiosity 
of  those  who  travel  to  see  it.  The  land  is  not  very  lofty,  but  broken  into  a  great  variety 
of  forms.  The  rocks  hang  about  it  in  huge,  disjointed  masses,  and  are  tumbled  together 

in 


2  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

in  magnificent  confusion.  Over  the  land,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  there  is  no  appear- 
ance of  cultivation,  and  no  capability  of  it;  it  is  one  wide  extent  of  sterility.  Mere 
barrenness  is  not  very  conciliating,  but  here,  the  nakedness  of  the  earth  is  in  excellent 
unison  with  the  vast  waste  of  sea  that  is  spread  around  it,  and  the  whole  prospect  forms 
a  scene  of  incomparable  cheerlessness,  where  nature  seems  to  reign  alone  in  sullen  majesty, 
and  where  the  dominion  of  man  can  never  interpose  one  feature  of  usefulness  or  comfort. 

It  is  said,  that  there  once  existed  a  considerable  tract  of  country,  called  the  Lioness, 
extending  from  the  Land's-End  towards  the  Scilly  Isles,  .which  has  been  entirely  over- 
whelmed by  the  sea.  Carew,  in  his  Survey  of  Cornwall,  reports,  that  in  his  time  the  space 
between  the  Land's-End  and  Scilly  was  still  called  the  Lioness,  and  that  about  midway 
there  was  a  rock  called  the  Gulf,  near  which  fishermen  had  frequently  drawn  up  with 
their  hooks  pieces  of  doors  and  windows.  In  spite  of  these  evidences,  I  consider  the  fact 
to  be  very  questionable.  All  the  remarkable  headlands  that  occur  between  the  Lizard 
and  Hertland  Point,  are  mentioned  by  Ptolemy  of  Alexandria,  who  lived  under  the 
emperors  Trajan,  Hadrian,  and  Antoninus  Pius,  and  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  geographers 
whose  works  are  extant.  If  the  region  called  the  Lioness  ever  existed,  it  must  have  been 
before  the  time  of  Ptolemy,  as  it  is  more  than  improbable,  that  after  the  inundation  which 
overwhelmed  it,  the  land  would  still  retain  the  same  forms,  the  same  indentations,  and  the 
same  projections,  which  are  now  identified  to  have  been  described  by  him.  The  names 
which  Ptolemy  assigns  to  the  headlands  were  first  given  to  them  by  the  Greeks  many  ages 
before  he  wrote ;  and  the  event  is  thus  traced  back  to  a  period,  at  least  sufficiently  remote, 
to  put  aside  the  evidence  of  a  few  fragments  of  doors  and  windows,  picked  up  two  cen- 
turies ago.  Doors  and  windows  will  perish.  Carew  observes,  that  there  is  an  equal  depth 
of  water  between  the  Land's-End  and  Scilly,  and  brings  forward  this  circumstance  as 
another  proof  in  support  of  the  pretensions  of  the  Lioness.  Now,  as  this  sunken  tract 
was  attached  to  Cornwall,  it  is  but  just  to  suppose  that  it  was  distributed  into  much  the 
same  forms  as  the  land  which  surrounded  it,  and  the  whole  county  is  conspicuous  for 
nothing  more  than  the  regular  undulations  of  its  surface,  If  this  fact  of  the  equal  depth 
of  water,  which  supposes  a  plain  of  nearly  thirty  miles,  has  been  ascertained,  I  think  that 
it  at  once  decides  the  question.  The  Lioness,  in  all  probability,  was  nothing  more  than, 
a  rock  at  sea,  which  may  now  have  disappeared,  and  which  derived  its  name  from  some 
supposed  resemblance  in  its  form  to  that  animal.  There  is  now  a  rock,  not  far  from  the 
Land's-End,  which  is  called  the  Wolf;  the  Lioness  was  perhaps  its  companion.  But 
nothing  is  further  from  my  intention,  than  to  stimulate  controversy  on  a  subject  now  so 
many  fathoms  below  all  rational  inquiry.  Till  the  Lioness  appears  again,  we  may  leave 
all  further  discussion  about  her  to  the  oysters. 

After  having  sufficiently  admired  the  wildness  and  sublimity  of  the  Land's-End,  and 
having  punctiliously  fulfilled  the  customary  observance  of  going  to  the  extreme  edge  of  the 
point,  we  proceeded  on ;  and  after  clambering  over  many  rugged  crags,  that  were  very 

picturesque 


VOYAGE    ROUJfD    CHEAT    UKITAIN.  3 

picturesque  and  fatiguing,  arrived  at  Whitsand  Bay.  There  is  seldom  a  .habitable  hole 
in  the  earth  in  which  we  do  not  discover  something  alive ;  and  here,  a  few  fishermen, 
taking  advantage  of  an  opening  in  the  cliffs,  have  erected  their  huts,  and  furnish  a  strong 
evidence  that  life  is  really  valuable,  when  it  is  simply  the  liberty  of  breathing.  The  little 
colony,  however,  that  eats  and  drinks  at  Whitsand  Cove  was  not  at  present  on  shore,  but 
lying  in  their  boats  in  the  bay,  waiting  till  the  tide  fell  and  enabled  them  to  land.  The 
weather  was  perfectly  fine,  but  there  was  so  heavy  a  surf  along  shore,  that  it  was  imprac- 
ticable for  any  boat  to  land  with  safety ;  and  we  afterwards  ascertained,  that  this  §urf  was 
always  in  the  way  for  at  least  four  hours  out  of  twelve ;  that  is,  for  two  hours  before,  and 
two  hours  after,  high  water. 

As  we  intended  to  hire  a  boat  here,  we  sat  down  on  the  turf,  to  wait  also  for  the 
ebbing  of  the  tide.  We  repressed  all  tendency  to  impatience  by  reflecting,  that  our  cir- 
cumstances were  not  more  deplorable  than  those  of  the  fishermen,  that  we  were  on  rather 
the  better  side  of  the  surf,  that  like  them,  we  could  sit,  and  unlike  them,  sit  still.  The 
magnificence  of  the  sea  on  this  coast  well  deserves  some  comment,  and  perhaps  so  fair  an 
occasion  as  the  present  may  not  occur  again,  when  I  have  nothing  better  to  do  than  to 
count  the  waves  as  they  burst  at  my  feet.  I  do  not  speak  of  the  sea  for  the  edification  or 
amusement  of  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  "  lying  to"  in  gales  of  wind  in  the  middle  of 
the  Atlantic,  and  are  apprized  of  the  complicated  horrors  of  a  hurricane  and  a  lee-shore, 
but  for  those  who  were  never  rocked  but  in  an  arm  chair,  and  love  to  gaze  at  the  water 
with  dry  feet,  and  in  a  land  of  umbrellas. 

There  is  no  part  of  the  English  coast  where  the  ocean  can  be  seen  in  such  grandeur  as 
on  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall,  which  is  entirely  open  to  the  whole  sweep  of  the  Atlantic. 
In  most  of  the  land-locked  channels  round  our  coast,  the  waves,  in  consequence  of  frequent 
sands  and  shoals,  are  short  and  broken,  but  here,  the  huge,  round  billows  come  rolling  on, 
each  a  mountain,  which  you  have  time  to  gaze  and  ponder  on,  while  you  may  distinctly 
trace  the  immense  chasm  which  separates  each  from  that  which  follows,  and  thus  pursue 
in  detail  the  march  of  the  mighty  sea,  as  it  moves  along  with  majestic  regularity.  In  the 
calmest  weather  there  frequently  rise  up  '  ground-swells,'  which  are  extremely  dangerous 
for  all  open  boats,  and  which,  not  being  to  be  foreseen  or  provided  against,  make  the  life 
of  a  fisherman  on  this  coast  as  precarious  as  his  sport.  I  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the 
causes  of  these  ground-swells,  but  could  learn  nothing  satisfactory  respecting  them.  Some 
assured  me,  that  they  were  the  forerunners  of  an  approaching  gale,  and  others,  that  they 
were  in  consequence  of  a  gale  that  was  passed ;  but  all  agreed,  that  they  were  more  to  be 
dreaded  than  a  gale,  as  they  came  on  without  warning.  They  occur  only  along  shore,  as 
their  name  imports,  and  beyond  them  the  sea  is  frequently  quite  calm.  In  this  case  the 
effect  is  very  singular ;  for  the  space  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  the  sea,  without  wind,  is  tossed, 
as  if  by  a  hurricane,  into  the  wildest  uproar  and  confusion,  while  beyond,  as  far  us  the  eye 
can  see,  it  is  one  still  surface  as  smooth  as  glass. 

B  But 


4  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

But  the  fishermen  I  perceive  have  just  landed,  so  that  we  may  now  proceed  to  business. 
Their  toil  had  been  rewarded  by  ample  success,  and  they  brought  on  shore  a  quantity  offish, 
which,  at  a  fishmonger's  in  Bond-street,  would  have  sold  for  a  price,  which  no  one  perhaps 
but  a  Bond-street  fishmonger  could  determine.  There  was  an  abundance  of  John  dory  and 
red  mullet,  animals  which  no  epicure  can  hear  named  without  emotion ;  and  which,  as 
the  fishermen  informed  us,  had  they  at  that  moment  been  in  the  Falmouth  market, "  would 
have  fetched  a  matter  of  twopence  or  threepence  a  piece."  When  we  informed  them,  that 
were  they  in  London  they  might  fetch  a  matter  of  half-a-guinea  or  fifteen  shillings  a  piece, 
they  were  infinitely  astonished,  and  regretted,  perhaps  for  the  first  time,  that  London  was 
three  hundred  miles  from  the  Land's-End.  Besides  the  dory  and  red  mullet,  they  catch 
other  excellent  fish ;  I  shall  only  mention  the  whiting-pollack,  which  naturalists  no  doubt 
have  placed  in  its  proper  class,  and  which  I  can  declare,  if  it  be  neither  salmon,  turbot. 
nor  cod,  is  at  least  as  good  as  either  of  them. 

A  large  beam  of  oak,  which,  we  were  told,  once  formed  a  part  of  the  ship  in  which 
Sir  Cloudesley  Shovel  was  wrecked  off  the  Scilly  Isles,  and  which  has  served  for  above  a 
century  for  the  support  of  a  capstan  by  which  the  fishermen  haul  up  their  boats,  was  the 
only  other  object  particularly  worthy  of  notice  at  Whitsand  Cove ;  and  its  identity  was 
only  just  sufficiently  explained  to  make  us  look  at  it  with  a  momentary  interest,  and  to 
suggest  a  few  reflections,  which  the  reader  may  readily  understand,  if  he  will  put  himself  in 
our  place  and  look  with  our  eyes. 

The  bargain  for  the  boat  was  speedily  adjusted,  and  we  then  committed  ourselves  to 
the  waves,  with  a  decent  horror  of  ground-swells,  and  with  minds  fully  awake  to  every 
thing  in  the  form  of  the  terrible.  Our  boatmen  were  anxious  that  our  apprehensions  should 
not  stagnate,  and  therefore  made  drowning  the  principal  subject  of  their  discourse.  All 
the  most  harrowing  accounts  of  wrecks  which  they  could  remember  or  invent,  they  dwelt 
on  with  unsparing  prolixity,  demonstrating,  that  the  sea  was  never  to  be  trusted,  and  that 
danger  was  often  very  near  when  it  was  little  expected.  In  spite,  however,  of  these 
stimulating  observations,  our  fears  gradually  subsided,  for  we  had  two  men  with  us  whose 
hair  had  grown  grey  in  the  very  boat  in  which  we  were,  and  as  danger  could  not  be  pre- 
vented, we  resigned  ourselves  cheerfully  to  chance,  with  the  consolation  of  reflecting,  that 
we  were  at  least  in  a  very  lucky  boat.  The  seamen  sympathizing  with  our  new-born 
gaiety,  changed  their  subject,  and  proceeded  to  point  out  to  us  the  wonders  of  the  coast. 
Almost  every  rock  had  some  little  history  attached  to  it.  Here,  on  a  frightful  pyramid, 
on  which  the  cormorants  alone  can  rest  with  safety,  a  man  had  stood  on  his  head,  without 
breaking  his  neck,  and  with  the  gain  of  two  quarts  of  beer.  Here,  was  a  rugged  steep,  which 
a  cat  might  have  despaired  to  ascend,  but  which  a  countryman,  more  bold,  had  clambered 
up  in  pursuit  of  a  bird's-nest ;  just  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  seizing  with  his  left  hand  his  pre- 
cious prey,  his  foot  slipped,  and  had  his  right  hand  been  less  firm  in  its  hold,  he  would 
inevitably  have  been  dashed  to  pieces.  At  a  short  distance  from  this  memorable  spot,  the 

bust 


VOYAGE    UOUXD    CHEAT    B  KIT  A I  If.  5 

bust  of  an  Irish  lady  was  shewn  to  us  ;  an  uncouth  fragment  of  projecting  rock,  something 
in  the  form  of  a  hogshead.  A  vessel  from  Ireland  was  wrecked  immediately  under  it,  and 
this  Irish  lady  was  the  only  person  on  board  who  was  saved.  The  rock,  had  its  resem- 
blance to  any  thing  human  been  a  little  less  hieroglyphical,  would  have  been  well  calculated 
to  commemorate  her  gratitude  to  the  end  of  time. 

When  a  man  is  tired  of  looking  at  stones,  and  of  considering  them  merely  in  their 
simple  state,  he  is  very  willing  that  his  subject  shall  receive  any  embellishments  that  it  is 
capable  of,  and  in  a  temper  of  mind  not  to  enquire  too  fastidiously  into  the  propriety  of 
their  application.  In  the  inland  parts  of  Cornwall  the  principal  objects  are  stones,  and 
as  stones  are  known  to  have  been  the  altars,  the  sepulchres,  and  the  idols  of  the  Druids, 
in  this  county  they  are  all  pressed  into  their  service,  and  no  two  lie  within  a  yard  of  each 
other  which  are  not  supposed  to  have  been  artificially  arranged.  If  the  Druids  did  not 
interfere  so  generally  with  the  stones  of  Cornwall  as  is  imagined,  at  least,  in  the  absence  of 
all  certain  authority,  or  of  any  authority  at  all  on  the  subject,  a  man  may  believe  that 
which  is  most  agreeable  to  him.  The  Irish  lady,  and  the  man  on  his  head,  certainly  en- 
liven the  rocks  on  the  coast,  though  I  ought  not  perhaps  to  conceal,  that  they  are  entirely 
inaccessible  to  any  animals  without  wings. 

Our  principal  object  in  this  cruise  was  to  go  round  and  explore  the  Longships ;  a 
shelf  of  rocks,  on  the  highest  of  which  is  erected  a  lighthouse.  They  are  immediately 
opposite  to  the  Land's-End,  and  distant  from  it  a  mile.  The  space  between  is  beset  with 
rocks  in  all  directions,  some  raised  considerably  above  water,  some  only  shewing  their 
black  and  horrid  points  at  certain  times  of  the  tide,  and  some  always  covered,  but  betrayed 
by  the  foam  of  the  sea,  which  curls  and  breaks  as  it  passes  over  them.  The  navigation 
amongst  them,  even  in  a  small  boat,  which  is  readily  governed  and  quickly  turned,  requires 
great  caution  and  experience,  but  in  vessels  of  larger  burden  it  would  be  a  trial  of  the 
utmost  danger,  and  therefore  few  are  ever  seen  here  but  those  which  are  driven  in  by  the 
violence  of  the  weather.  As  the  sea  was  now  very  smooth,  we  were  enabled  to  effect  a 
landing  on  the  Longships,  a  privilege  which  the  demon  who  reigns  over  this  reef  of  granite 
(and  I  suppose  there  is  one)  extends  to  very  few,  and  on  few  occasions.  There  is  generally 
a  tremendous  surf  round  them,  and  in  gales  of  wind  whole  seas  pass  entirely  over  them, 
burying  the  lighthouse  with  their  spray.  The  ascent  is  very  steep  and  jagged,  and  it  is 
ridiculous  to  enquire  for  the  path.  With  some  trifling  damage  to  our  hands,  which  were 
little  familiarized  with  travelling  like  our  feet,  over  a  surface  to  be  imitated  only  by  broken 
bottles,  we  reached  the  summit. 

Rocks  rising  from  the  sea  are  not  uncommon,  and  certainly  not  prepossessing  objects ; 
but  topped  with  a  building  raised  by  human  hands,  and  inhabited  by  human  beings,  the 
Longships,  bleak  and  inhospitable  as  they  are,  at  once  become  interesting :  this  little 
tower  gives  additional  character  to  the  mournful  waste,  and  quickens  the  desolation  of  the 
scene.  How  cheering  must  the  sight  of  it  be  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  when  its  light 

points 


0  TOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

points  out  to  the  distant  ship  the  dangers  of  her  course,  and  guides  her  in  safety  through 
them ! 

The  lighthouse  was  erected  under  the  authority  of  the  Corporation  of  Trinity  House, 
of  Deptford  Strond,  at  the  request  of  the  trade,  for  the  benefit  of  vessels  sailing  round  the 
Land's-End  into  the  British  and  St.  George's  channels.  It  was  begun  in  1791>  but  owing 
to  some  unexpected  impediments,  was  not  completed  till  1795,  in  September  of  which 
year  the  light  was  first  exhibited.  The  tower  is  built  of  granite :  the  stones  are  dovetailed, 
and  the  courses  treenailed,  on  the  same  plan  that  was  adopted  by  Smeaton  in  the  con- 
struction of  the  Edystone.  The  circumference  of  the  tower  at  its  base  is  sixty-eight  feet, 
and  the  height,  from  the  rock  to  the  vane  of  the  lantern,  fifty-two  feet.  The  height  of  the 
rock,  from  the  sea  to  the  base  of  the  lighthouse,  is  sixty  feet.  Though  thus  considerably 
raised  above  the  sea,  yet  a  large  body  of  water  sometimes  passes  over  the  building.  During 
heavy  gales  it  rocks  violently  under  the  shock  of  the  wind  and  waves,  but  is  constructed 
with  such  admirable  skill,  and  is  so  incorporated  with  the  rock  on  which  it  stands,  that  it 
has  now  weathered  the  storms  of  more  than  twenty  winters,  without  sensible  injury  of  any 
kind.  The  lantern,  on  the  improved  principle,  is  furnished  with  Argand  lamps  and 
reflectors,  and  gives  a  very  brilliant  light.  This  is  seen  many  leagues  off  at  sea  by  ships 
approaching  the  Land's-End,  and  affords  them  an  infallible  guide,  which  warns  them  of 
the  Longships  and  other  rocks  situated  near  that  promontory.  These  rocks  lie  very  much 
in  the  way  of  navigation,  and  before  the  establishment  of  the  light,  had  occasioned  the 
wreck  of  many  vessels,  and  the  loss  of  many  lives.  No  shipwrecks  have  happened  on  the 
Longships,  or  near  them,  during  the  last  ten  years. 

The  business  of  the  lighthouse  is  attended  to  by  two  men,  who  reside  in  it,  and  are 
relieved,  when  the  weather  will  permit,  every  month.  In  the  winter  time,  the  Longships 
can  seldom  be  approached  by  a  boat,  and  the  men  have  not  unfrequently  been  entombed 
for  four  or  five  months,  without  the  possibility  of  being  released.  Surely  nothing  can  be 
more  dismal,  nothing  more  repulsive  to  the  common  and  strongest  feelings  of  human 
nature,  than  the  state  of  the  two  chosen  individuals,  thus  chained  to  this  horrid  rock.  In 
rough  weather  they  are  often  confined  for  weeks  together  within  doors,  and  when  the  sun 
shines,  and  all  nature  looks  gay  to  their  eyes,  but  the  spot  to  which  they  are  confined,  they 
have  no  variety  but  that  of  scrambling  up  and  down  a  few  feet  of  craggy  rock,  at  the  risk 
of  breaking  their  necks.  It  is  hard  to  earn  the  means  of  living  by  giving  up  all  that  makes 
life  desirable.  If  this  lighthouse  were  a  prison  for  criminals,  and  prison  their  punishment, 
we  should  find  it  difficult  to  conceive  a  crime  black  enough  to  justify  the  cruelty  of  per- 
mitting them  to  live :  yet  these  miserable  outcasts  condemn  themselves  to  it,  merely 
that  they  may  live.  They  may  console  themselves  with  the  reflection,  that  the  Edystone 
is  at  least  as  cheerless  as  the  Longships  ;  1  know  of  no  other  situation  which  will  not  gain 
in  the  comparison  with  this  appalling  state  of  solitary  servitude.  The  extensive  use  of  the 
tower  will  certainly,  even  on  considerations  of  humanity,  reconcile  us  to  the  wretchedness 

of 


The  Lands-end,  Cornwall 


The  Long-ships  Lighthouse  off  the  Lands-end  Cornwall 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  7 

of  the  individuals  who  are  inclosed  in  it,  and  therefore  regret  does  not  mingle  with  my 
wonder,  that  any  should  be  found  ready  to  devote  themselves  to  this  terrible  banishment, 
not  influenced  by  any  generous  enthusiasm  for  the  public  good,  but  merely  by  interested 
motives  of  self-preferment. 

From  the  Longships  we  had  a  complete  view  of  the  whole  of  the  coast  of  Cornwall  which 
immediately  faces  the  west;  from  the  many-syllabled  headland,  Point  Tol-Pedan-Penwith  to 
Cape  Cornwall,  a  line  of  about  three  leagues.  The  whole  is,  in  sea  phrase,  perfectly  iron- 
bound,  and  of  the  same  character  as  that  already  described  about  the  LandVEnd,  wild, 
rugged,  and  sublime,  and  formed  of  a  material  able  to  resist  the  battering  of  the  Atlantic 
to  the  end  of  time.  I  know  not  why  we  should  be  anxious  to  drive  back  the  sea  from  his 
just  possessions,  and  though  on  this  coast  it  has  been  imagined  that  there  exist  many 
grounds  of  accusation  against  him,  yet  I  know  none  that  presents  so  few  reasonable 
evidences  of  his  usurpations.  It  is  composed  entirely  of  granite,  and  nothing  but  a  sea  of 
granite  could  make  any  impression  on  it. 

When  we  took  our  leave  of  the  men  at  the  lighthouse,  they  expressed  a  very  natural 
surprise  that  we  could  find  any  thing  to  delight  us  in  their  dreary  neighbourhood,  and  did 
not  see  us  depart  without  a  few  words  of  regret  at  their  own  confinement,  and  a  few 
mournful  remarks  on  the  unequal  condition  of  men.  Though  by  no  means  alive  to  that 
keen  consciousness  of  our  superior  privileges,  which  these  poor  fellows,  in  the  bitterness 
of  their  feelings  no  doubt  attributed  to  us,  yet  we  could  not  look  at  them  and  deny  to 
ourselves,  that  happiness  in  this  world  is  very  partially  awarded. 

Our  next  resting  place  was  at  Port  East.  The  name  had  excited  some  expectations; 
but  on  arriving  thither,  we  found  an  establishment  of  three  fishing-boats,  one  mackarel-net, 
and  three  lobster-pots.  At  this  spot,  as  at  Whitsand  Bay,  a  small  chasm  in  the  cliffs  sug- 
gested to  a  few  adventurers  the  practicability  of  securing  a  landing  place  for  a  boat ;  and 
thus,  was  founded  Port  East.  Any  further  speculation  on  the  subject  of  its  original  state 
would  be  superfluous ;  it  could  never  have  been  more  inconsiderable  than  at  present,  and 
it  is  altogether  unsusceptible  of  improvement.  The  landing  is  even  more  incommodious 
than  at  Whitsand  Cove,  and  we  here  made  our  first  experiment  of  being  soused  in  the  surf. 
A  little  to  the  northward  of  Port  East  is  Cape  Cornwall,  a  bold  headland,  which  forms  the 
western  boundary  of  the  English  channel ;  after  doubling  this  point  you  enter  the  Bristol 
channel. 

At  the  very  edge  of  the  cliff  near  Port  East  we  saw  a  tin-mine,  an  object  which  does 
not  present  any  thing  that  is  very  interesting  on  the  face  of  it.  We  had  not  heroism  suf- 
ficient to  venture  down  to  the  bottom  ;  and  indeed,  the  picturesque  underground  is  not 
fairly  to  be  comprehended  within  the  limits  of  our  enterprise.  To  pass  through  Cornwall, 
however,  without  mentioning  its  mines,  the  source  of  all  its  wealth  and  importance,  would 
be  unpardonable ;  and  yet  I  fear  I  can  disclose  little  on  the  subject  that  will  prove  either 
instructive  or  entertaining. 

To 


8  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

To  begin  with  as  much  solemnity  as  possible,  I  may  observe,  that  it  is  not  clearly 
ascertained  who  were  the  earliest  traders  who  came  to  this  county  for  tin ;  that  the  first 
uses  to  which  this  metal  was  applied  are  only  to  be  conjectured,  and  that  the  question  of 
primeval  saucepans  and  kettles  is  involved  in  infinite  obscurity.  That  the  Phenicians 
made  voyages  to  Cornwall  for  tin  is  decided,  and  that  the  Romans,  during  their  sovereignty 
in  this  country,  did  not  neglect  the  mines,  is  not  only  proved  by  historical  records,  but  by 
the  evidence  of  their  works  still  remaining.  The  individual  who  first  came  to  Britain  in 
the  guise  of  a  tin-trader  is  pointed  out  by  Pliny,  and  if  the  business  rested  with  me,  I 
should  be  very  happy  to  rely  implicitly  on  his  authority  :  "  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that  the 
oldest  classical  appellation  for  the  extreme  western  point  of  Cornwall  should  be  Belerium, 
or  the  Promontory  of  Hercules,  the  reputed  founder  of  Tyre,  also  known  by  the  title  of 
Melicartus  :  and  according  to  Pliny,  a  person  of  that  name,  corruptly  written  Medacritus, 
was  the  person  who  first  brought  tin  from  the  island  Cassiteris  (the  Scilly  Isles} .  Without 
the  assistance  of  this  metal  the  celebrated  shield  of  Achilles  could  not  have  been  wrought, 
for  tin  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  painter,  the  gilder,  and  the  dyer*."  It  may  perhaps 
be  permitted  me  to  remark,  that  had  it  not  been  for  the  discovery  of  this  inestimable 
metal,  the  best  worm-medicine  also  now  in  use  would  be  unknown,  for  serviceable  as  it 
may  be  to  painters  and  gilders,  it  is  nevertheless  death  to  worms. 

But  precious  and  widely  useful  as  it  is,  I  fear  that  some  of  its  properties,  and  some 
of  the  most  signal  too,  are  now  forgotten.  Carew,  in  his  Survey  of  Cornwall,  after  having 
summed  up  in  modest  terms  some  of  the  less  important  productions  of  the  count}',  bursts 
out  into  the  following  animated  panegyric  on  tin ;  and  though  he  raises  it  so  much  above 
the  vulgar  station,  to  which  a  more  ignorant  man  would  have  confined  it  amongst  the 
utensils  of  the  kitchen,  he  is  still  apprehensive  that  he  has  not  done  it  justice.  "  But  why 
seek  wee  in  corners  for  pettie  commodities,  when  as  the  onely  mynerall  of  Cornish  tynne 
openeth  so  large  a  field  to  the  countries  benefit :  this  is  in  working  so  pliant,  for  sight  so 
faire,  and  in  use  so  necessarie,  as  thereby  the  inhabitants  gaine  wealth,  the  marchants 
trafticke,  and  the  whole  realme  a  reputation ;  and  with  such  plenty  thereof  hath  God 
stuffed  the  bowels  of  this  little  angle,  that  (as  Astiages  dreamed  of  his  daughter)  it  over- 
floweth  England,  watereth  Christendome,  and  is  derived  to  a  great  part  of  the  world  besides. 
In  travailing  abroad,  in  tarrying  at  home,  in  eating  and  drinking,  in  doing  ought  of  pleasure 
or  necessity,  tynne,  either  in  his  own  shape,  or  transformed  into  other  fashions,  is  always 
requisite,  always  readie  for  our  service ;  but  I  shall  rather  disgrace  then  endeere  it  by  mine 
overweake  commendation,  and  sooner  tire  myself  then  draw  the  fountaine  of  his  praises  drie. 
Let  this  therefore  suffice,  that  it  cannot  bee  of  meane  price,  which  hath  found  with  it 
diamond,  amongst  it  gold,  and  in  it  silver-f." 

As  I  am  myself  profoundly  unskilled  in  the  mysteries  of  the  mines,  and  can,  from  my 

*  See  Clarke's  Progress  of  Maritime  Discovery,  Introduction,  |  age  132.  f  Book  1st.  page  8. 

own 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  9 

own  knowledge,  give  them  credit  for  nothing  more  than  furnishing  tea-kettles  for  the  uni- 
verse, it  will  be  prudent  to  close  my  observations  on  the  subject  here.  I  can  certainly  add 
nothing  in  the  form  of  embellishment  to  my  last  quotation. 

From  Port  East  we  directed  our  course  inland  about  half  a  mile,  to  St.  Just,  a  little 
village,  which,  saving  a  butcher's  and  baker's  shop,  has  nothing  in  it  to  gratify  the  attention 
of  a  stranger.  It  is  said,  that  there  are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  amphitheatre  of  British 
construction  in  its  neighbourhood ;  but  not  being  profound  antiquarians,  they  escaped 
our  dull  sight,  though  twenty  different  places,  at  great  intervals  from  each  other,  were 
pointed  out  to  us,  on  all  of  which  we  were  confidently  assured  that  they  stood,  by  different 
people  of  the  village,  all  anxious  to  confirm  the  honours  of  St.  Just.  Doctor  Borlase  * 
observes,  that  there  are  many  remains  of  amphitheatres  in  Cornwall,  and  that  the  early 
Britons  used  to  assemble  in  them  to  see  plays  acted.  The  state  of  the  drama  at  so  distant 
a  period  it  is  impossible  to  determine ;  and  I  think  it  questionable,  whether  these  amphi- 
theatres were  the  scenes  of  any  nobler  pastimes  than  wrestling  matches  and  other  contests 
of  strength,  in  which  the  audience  were  not  called  upon  to  sympathise  with  the  elaborate 
joys  and  sorrows  of  fictitious  heroes,  but  gave  all  their  applause  to  the  best  cudgel,  and  all 
their  pity  to  a  broken  head.  For  many  ages  the  Cornish  men  have  been  singularly  at- 
tached to  the  exercise  of  wrestling;  and  if  any  one,  in  the  wantonness  of  curiosity,  should 
inquire  who  was  the  first  wrestler,  he  may  perhaps  be  surprised  to  hear  himself  thus  satis- 
factorily answered.  Corineus,  cousin  to  Brutus,  who  was  great-grandson  to  Eneas,  and 
moreover  the  first  conqueror  of  Britain,  came  hither  with  his  powerful  relation  one  thou- 
sand one  hundred  and  thirty-eight  years  before  Christ.  Near  Ptymouth  he  encountered 
a  mighty  giant  called  Gogmagog,  immediately  challenged  him  to  a  wrestling  match,  and 
fortunately  '  gave  him  a  fall'  over  the  cliff,  which  broke  his  neck  and  put  an  end  to  him 
and  the  contest  at  once.  The  victorious  Corineus  received  Cornwall  as  the  reward  of  his 
prowess,  and  some  maintain  that  the  county  derives  its  name  from  this  great  giant-killer-f-. 
On  this  last  circumstance  I  do  not  myself  insist,  but  certain  it  is,  that  from  the  defeat  of 
Gogmagog,  to  this  hour,  the  world  has  never  held  two  opinions  about  the  terrors  of  a 
Cornish  hug. 

From  St.  Just  we  returned  to  the  coast,  and  proceeded  along  the  cliffs  by  paths  not 
untrodden,  but  very  little  improved  by  art.  Antiquarians  have  discovered  many  traces  of 
Roman  ways  in  the  western  parts  of  Cornwall,  and  I  confess,  not  without  some  sense  of 
abasement,  that  they  entirely  escaped  my  observation.  Our  course  was  principally  over 
the  viae  diverticulae,  or  lanes  and  by-paths,  the  passage  over  some  of  which  entitled  us  to 
the  fame  of  Hannibal.  After  having  escaped  with  life  over  one,  even  fancifully  rugged 
and  unaccommodating,  we  had  the  blushes  called  into  our  cheeks  by  being  asked,  if  we  had 
not  been  delighted  with  the  evidences  which  we  had  just  seen  of  Roman  art  and  industry. 

*  See  History  and  Antiquities  of  Cornwall,  page  208.  f  Carew's  Survey  of  Cornwall,  page  1. 

We 


10  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

We  had  indeed  been  stumbling  and  dislocating  our  ancles  over  a  Roman  way,  and  that 
too,  with  a  criminal  unconsciousness  of  every  thing  but  extreme  inconvenience. 

There  are  numberless  remains  of  insignificant  castles,  entrenchments,  and  earthworks, 
raised  immediately  upon  the  cliffs,  at  the  western  extremity,  and  on  the  whole  line  of  the 
north  coast  of  Cornwall,  some  of  which  we  had  the  merit  to  observe.  On  authority  much 
higher  than  my  own,  I  venture  to  divide  the  honour  of  their  construction  equally  between 
the  Irish  and  the  Danes,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  Cornish  and  all  other  pretenders.  And 
first,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Polwhele*,  I  will  offer  a  few  observations  in  support  of  the 
claims  of  the  Irish.  When  the  Romans  first  penetrated  into  Cornwall,  great  numbers  of 
the  inhabitants  fled  before  the  invaders,  and  leaving  their  property  to  be  sacked  without 
opposition,  secured  at  least  their  personal  liberty  by  migrating  to  Ireland.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, to  be  imagined  that  they  deserted  their  possessions  without  regret,  or  that  they  failed 
to  cast  many  a  longing  look  from  the  land  of  their  retreat  towards  the  opposite  shores, 
where  they  had  sacrificed  every  thing  but  freedom.  Accordingly,  in  a  short  time  they  began 
to  make  incursions  on  their  own  coast,  in  the  hope  of  recovering  some  of  their  own  pro- 
perty, and  in  those  attacks  are  stigmatized  by  historians,  perhaps  rather  harshly,  with  the 
name  of  pirates.  Now,  as  it  is  proved  that  the  Irish,  or  rather  the  Cornish  from  Ireland, 
made  invasions  on  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall,  we  have  at  least  advanced  a  plausible 
pretension  on  their  parts  to  the  numerous  castles,  the  ruins  of  which  are  now  distinguishable. 
It  remains  only  to  ascertain,  how  far  their  claims  are  supported  by  the  "  names,  the  general 
and  particular  situation,  the  structure,  and  the  present  appearance"  of  these  edifices. 

The  names  give  us  the  negative  support  of  being  neither  Saxon  nor  Danish,  though  it 
is  but  common  candour  to  acknowledge,  that  in  those  predatory  times,  when  possession 
was  at  least  as  capricious  as  the  wind  which  blows  from  Ireland  to  Cornwall,  names  too 
might  have  been  subject  to  some  variation.  A  fortress  built  by  the  Saxons  or  Danes 
might  have  changed  its  name  as  often  as  its  owner.  "  The  titles  Caer-bran,  Castle-les- 
gud-zek,  '  the  palace  or  the  court  of  Brennus,'  *  the  castle  of  the  bloody  field,'  may  cer- 
tainly have  been  either  Cornish  or  Roman-Cornish,  but  they  are  names  which  the  Cornish 
would  not  have  themselves  imposed,  though  it  was  natural  to  retain  such  original  appella- 
tions in  memory  of  the  invasions,  and  with  an  ironical  reference  perhaps  to  the  fate  of  the 
invaders."  The  force  and  propriety  of  this  irony  is  not  very  evident,  and  I  heartily  wish 
(for  my  feelings  are  altogether  with  the  Irish)  that  we  could  have  brought  forward  the 
affirmative  authority  of  these  names  in  a  stronger  point  of  view. 

The  situation  of  these  castles  furnishes  strong  proofs  that  they  were  raised  by  some 
foreign  invaders,  and  not  by  the  natives.  The  greater  number  of  them  is  in  the  western- 
most and  narrowest  part  of  Cornwall,  and  if  we  attribute  them  to  the  Cornish  or  Roman- 
Cornish,  we  must  suppose,  "  that  they  preferred  the  defence  of  this  little  nook  to  the  more 

*  History  of  Cornwall,  page  1 13  to  1 17. 

valuable 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIJC.  11 

valuable  and  spacious  parts  of  the  county ;  that  they  threw  up  numerous  military  works 
to  cover  their  retreat  from  an  enemy,  where  there  could  not  be  room  enough  for  half  the 
people  of  Cornwall ;  or  if  we  allow  room  enough,  whither  the  invaders  on  the  north-east 
or  south-east  shores  would  wish  to  drive  the  inhabitants,  and  having  secured  them  there 
by  a  line  from  the  north  to  the  south  sea,  could  effectually  prevent  their  ever  returning  to 
the  east  again."  I  hope  it  will  not  be  objected,  that  the  Cornish  might  have  erected  these 
fortifications  not  with  a  view  to  invasion  from  the  north-east  or  south-east,  but  from  the 
west,  and  that  they  may  therefore  have  considered  them,  not  as  a  simple  defence  for  a 
worthless  nook  of  land,  but  as  a  bulwark  for  the  protection  of  the  interior.  Military  works, 
I  fear,  are  not  always  intended  for  the  inhabitants  of  a  whole  province,  but  are  sometimes 
thought  to  answer  a  good  purpose  if  they  can  maintain  a  garrison  sufficient  to  defend  and 
hold  them  as  strong  posts,  which  may  command  the  surrounding  country. 

If  then  these  fortresses  must  have  been  the  work  of  foreign  invaders,  it  could  be  no 
other  than  the  Irish,  "  because  they  are  situated  opposite  to  Ireland."  But  I  hasten  to 
their  structure.  "  Those  which  include  promontories  and  rocks,  have  their  trenches 
towards  the  land,  to  guard  against  the  enemy  expected  to  come  from  the  land,  not  the  sea; 
to  secure  the  invader  in  making  a  descent,  or  in  retreating  to  his  ships."  If  these  circum- 
stances do  not  irrefragably  determine  that  the  castles  were  built  by  the  Irish,  and  not 
by  the  Danes,  they  certainly  seem  to  exclude  the  Cornish,  whom  we  have  not,  till  in  this 
division  of  our  argument,  been  able  to  place  entirely  hors  de  combat.  For  their  present 
appearance  all  that  can  be  remarked  is,  "  that  they  are  dismantled ;  and  the  Cornish  would 
not  have  destroyed  their  own  fortresses."  But  time  destroys  all  things,  and  can  dismantle 
a  Cornish  castle.  Nothing  more  I  believe  can  be  said  in  favour  of  the  Irish,  and  little  will 
suffice  for  the  Danes.  All  the  strongest  facts  which  have  been  advanced  for  the  former 
will  apply  to  the  latter,  and  as  an  author  of  great  repute  as  an  antiquarian,  Dr.  Borlase, 
in  the  question  of  these  disputed  ruins,  sides  decidedly  with  the  Danes,  I  can  do  no  less, 
after  all  that  I  have  adduced  from  the  suggestions  of  Mr.  Polwhele,  than  divide  my  own 
opinion  equally  between  them.  It  is  difficult  to  prove  facts  of  so  remote  a  period  by  con- 
jecture, and  there  are  some,  who  question  the  utility  of  writing  quartos  on  subjects  where 
all  proof  is  wanting,  and  which  no  proof  could  make  interesting. 

After  blundering  over  Roman  entrenchments,  Irish  and  Danish  castles,  and  loose 
stones,  unrecorded  and  innumerable,  we  arrived  at  Pendeen  Cove,  where  there  is  a  settle- 
ment of  half  a  dozen  fishermen.  I  do  not  pass  these  little  places  unnoticed,  for  they 
really  give  infinite  character  to  the  coast.  Boats,  with  their  masts,  and  sails,  and  oars,  and 
anchors,  and  the  multifarious  apparatus  of  fishing  tackle,  nets  and  lines,  all  strewed  upon 
the  beach,  are  certainly  picturesque,  and  present  an  appearance  of  life  and  employment 
that  is  always  pleasing  to  us,  but  more  particularly  so,  after  having  been  benumbed  by  a 
long  tract  of  savageness  and  solitude.  Except  where  these  chasms  occur,  the  whole  line 
of  coast  is  precipitous  and  insurmountable,  and  they  appear  to  have  been  kindly  designed 

c  by 


12  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

by  nature,  that  man  might  not  be  altogether  shut  out  from  the  eye  and  enjoyment  of  the 
sea.  The  coast  both  to  the  north  and  south  of  Pendeen  Cove  is  grand  beyond  description. 
The  cliffs  are  composed  of  huge  and  overhanging  masses  of  rock,  loosely  piled  on  each 
other,  while  enormous  fragments,  which  have  the  appearance  of  having  been  torn  down 
by  some  violent  convulsion,  lie  in  strange  disorder  beneath.  It  is  the  perfection  of  rugged 
scenery ;  nature  can  never  exhibit  herself  more  naked  of  decoration  than  here ;  she  can 
never  appear  more  rude  nor  more  in  ruins. 

At  a  short  distance  from  the  Cove  a  mysterious  cave  was  pointed  out  to  us,  called 
Pendeen-Vau,  which  is  conceived  by  the  rustics  to  be  interminable,  for  they  had 
penetrated  at  least  fifty  yards,  and  still,  found  no  end.  At  the  entrance  of  it  there 
appeared  some  years  ago  a  strange  lady  with  a  red  rose  in  her  mouth,  for  what  purpose 
it  was  not  easy  to  ascertain,  for  the  good  people  seemed  unwilling  to  allow  their 
imaginations  to  dwell  on  the  possible  horrors  of  the  circumstance.  This  cave  was 
probably  used  in  remote  ages  as  a  place  of  concealment  for  property  during  times  of 
war  and  invasion*. 

We  were  not  able  to  pursue  our  way  in  a  direct  line  along  the  edge  of  the  cliffs,  but 
were  frequently  obliged  to  make  tedious  circuits  of  two  or  three  miles,  and  then  return 
to  the  coast,  at  an  advancement  of  not  more  than  three  or  four  hundred  yards  from  the 
point  where  we  left  it.  In  one  of  these  diversions  we  passed  through  the  little  village 
of  Morva,  where  we  witnessed  a  scene  of  living  manners,  which,  though  it  might  have 
occurred  at  any  other  village,  and  be  not  strictly  within  the  circle  of  my  business,  I  shall 
yet  venture  to  describe,  if  it  be  only  for  the  sake  of  a  short  reprieve  from  the  unsociable 
silence  of  the  rocks  and  the  sea.  As  we  were  passing  by  the  church,  we  saw  a  number 
of  people  assembled  on  the  outside  of  the  churchyard  wall,  who  directed  their  attention, 
with  looks  of  great  anxiety  and  curiosity,  to  the  labours  of  a  man  who  was  digging  a 
grave.  We  stopped  to  enquire  of  a  young  man,  who  was  standing  at  a  distance  from 
the  group,  the  cause  of  these  melancholy  preparations;  but  he  seemed  confused,  and 
turned  away  his  head,  and  made  no  reply.  On  applying  to  another  person,  we  were 
informed  that  the  grave  was  for  a  young  girl,  who  had  poisoned  herself  to  avoid  the 
shame  of  bringing  into  the  world  a  bastard  child,  and  that  the  youth  to  whom  we  first 
addressed  ourselves  was  her  brother.  My  story  has  hitherto  disclosed  no  very  extraor- 
dinary particulars,  and  presents  merely  a  vulgar  case  of  sin  and  suffering,  best  to  be 
adjusted  by  the  overseers  of  the  parish.  It  was  the  character  and  feelings  of  the 
wretched  brother,  whom  we  had  unintentionally  distressed  by  our  enquiries,  that  prin- 
cipally awakened  our  interest.  When  we  left  Morva  to  pursue  our  journey  he  followed 
us,  and,  after  some  little  hesitation,  entered  into  conversation  with  us.  He  observed, 
that  he  thought  it  a  very  unlucky  chance,  that  we  should  pass  through  the  village  at  the 

*  Borlase,  Hist,  and  Antiq.  of  Cornwall,  page  293. 

very 


VOVAGE    ROUXD    CHEAT    BBITAIX.  13 

very  hour  when  so  sad  a  business  was  going  on,  but  that  it  was  still  more  unfortunate, 
that  he  should  have  been  called  upon  to  explain  to  two  strangers  the  story  of  his  sister's 
shame,  which  he  had  hoped  would  never  have  been  known  out  of  sight  of  her  grave. 
He  assured  us  that  she  had  been  a  most  amiable  girl,  greatly  and  generally  beloved,  and 
indeed  nothing  but  a  source  of  comfort  and  joy  to  her  parents,  to  her  brothers  and 
sisters,  and  to  all  who  knew  her.  On  this  subject  he  was  very  eloquent,  and  there  was 
something  inexpressibly  touching  in  the  earnestness  with  which  he  endeavoured  to 
impress  upon  our  minds  the  good  qualities  of  his  sister,  and  divert  us  from  the  contempla- 
tion of  her  guilt.  He  dwelt  with  warmth  on  many  tender  recollections  of  her  kindness 
and  goodnature ;  she  had  been  the  charm  of  their  home :  she  had  been  always  cheerful 
herself,  and  it  had  been  always  her  study  to  make  others  so :  she  had  loved  him  with  the 
utmost  affection,  and  had  nursed  him  through  a  long  illness  with  unchanging  sweetness ; 
and  here  the  tears  streamed  down  his  cheeks,  and  he  could  speak  no  more.  We  under- 
stood that  the  ill-fated  girl,  with  that  tenderness  which  in  all  ranks  and  in  all  circum- 
stances is  still  the  gift  and  the  charm  of  woman,  had  refused  to  disclose  the  name  of  her 
seducer.  In  her  last  agonies,  with  a  constancy  which  pain  could  not  abate,  nor  the  fear  of 
death  overcome,  she  preserved  her  secret,  and  declared,  that  it  would  be  her  latest  con- 
solation to  reflect  that  the  author  of  all  her  misery  would  escape  from  punishment  and 
reproach.  Her  poor  brother,  when  he  took  his  leave  of  us,  said,  that  he  felt  his  mind  con- 
siderably relieved  by  his  communication  with  us,  for  that  he  could  not  have  borne  that  we 
should  have  departed,  knowing  nothing  of  his  dear  sister  but  the  last  frightful  action,  which 
was  the  only  one  of  her  life  that  could  be  blamed.  If  these  pages  could  possibly  meet  his 
eye,  he  would  remember  the  two  strangers  whose  good  opinion  he  was  so  anxious  to  con- 
ciliate, as  if  with  a  prophetic  notice,  that  it  was  their  object  to  prattle  about  every  thing 
which  they  heard  and  saw. 

We  pursued  our  zig-zag  march  for  many  miles  and  more  hours,  during  which  we 
beheld  many  scenes  of  the  same  stupendous  character  as  those  which  I  have  already 
noticed,  and  which  I  should  be  happy  to  illustrate  by  a  more  particular  description,  had 
I  not  already  drawn  so  deeply  from  my  vocabulary  of  rock  epithets.  At  length  we  entered 
St.  Ives,  which  in  a  right  line  along  the  coast  is  not  more  than  sixteen  miles  from  the 
Land's-End.  This  town  derives  its  name  from  an  Irish  saint,  St.  lia,  an  Irish  nobleman's 
daughter,  who  settled  there  in  the  year  460.  She  was  a  lady  of  singular  piety,  and  had 
been  a  disciple  of  St.  Barricus,  first  bishop  of  Cork.  I  have  not  ascertained  on  what  pre- 
tence she  came  to  Cornwall,  nor  why  the  people  of  this  county  permitted  a  foreigner  to 
establish  her  authority  amongst  them,  at  a  time  when  saints  were  much  too  abundant  to 
be  welcome  only  for  their  sanctity. 

St.  Ives  is  situated  at  the  western  extremity  of  a  fine  capacious  bay.     The  town  is 
neat  and  decent,  and  contains  3200  inhabitants,  who,  when  distributed  into  the  usual 

subdivisions 


14  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

subdivisions  of  so  many  individuals  in  a  family,  and  so  many  families  in  a  house,  have  all  a 
roof  over  their  heads,  and  a  spot  which  they  can  call  home.  In  speaking  of  towns,  I  do 
not  think  it  necessary  to  pursue  the  question  of  bricks  and  mortar  through  all  its  changes, 
nor  to  write  with  the  solemnity  of  geographical  description,  of  opposite  alleys,  and  parallel 
gutters,  divided  by  a  high-street,  and  crowned  with  a  market-place.  Details  of  the  mere 
local  history  of  houses  must  be  very  dull  and  insignificant;  and  when  we  have  fairly  repre- 
sented the  whole  state  and  circumstances  of  one  well-chosen,  commodious  dwelling-house, 
there  remains  nothing  on  this  subject  but  a  sickening  repetition  of  ditto,  ditto,  ditto, 
through  every  town  in  England.  But  though  I  do  not  intend  scrupulously  to  count  the 
bricks  and  the  chimneys  in  all  the  towns  which  I  pass  through,  yet  I  have  a  due  reverence 
for  all  public  buildings,  castles,  and  cathedrals,  and  whenever  they  occur  1  shall  be  careful 
to  notice  them  as  significantly  as  I  can. 

There  is  a  large  harbour  at  St.  Ives,  defended  by  a  handsome  and  substantial  pier, 
which  in  the  winter  time  frequently  affords  shelter  to  two  hundred  vessels ;  though  the 
quantity  of  sand  driven  into  it  by  the  north-west  winds  so  much  diminishes  the  depth  of 
water,  that  it  cannot  receive  ships  of  any  considerable  burden. 

The  pilchard  fishery  is  carried  on  here  to  a  great  extent,  and  as  the  pilchards  luckily 
visited  this  coast  at  the  same  time  that  we  did,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  whole 
process  of  catching  and  preserving  them.  A  scan  net  is  employed  of  immense  size ;  two 
hundred  fathoms  in  circumference,  and  capable  of  containing  more  than  two  hundred 
hogsheads  of  pilchards.  A  hogshead  will  hold  three  thousand  pilchards.  When  the  fisher- 
men put  to  sea,  they  are  directed  where  to  cast  their  nets  by  people  called  Huers,  who  are 
stationed  on  the  heights,  and  can  distinguish  the  approach  of  a  shoal  by  a  red  tinge  in  the 
water,  and  the  flights  of  eager  gulls,  Avho  perhaps  little  imagine,  while  they  are  hovering 
and  screaming  with  triumph  over  their  prey,  that  they  are  pointing  it  out  to  animals  still 
more  rapacious  than  themselves.  When  a  shoal  is  in  sight,  the  Huers  at  once  justify  the 
propriety  of  their  name,  and  the  importance  of  their  office,  by  raising  a  prodigious  outcry, 
which  luckily  reaches  the  ears  of  the  fishermen,  without  alarming  the  suspicions  of  the  fish. 
I  cannot  explain  scientifically  the  mode  of  casting  and  hauling  the  net,  but  the  complicated 
business  terminates  in  securing,  sometimes  at  one  draught,  two  hundred  hogsheads  of  pil- 
chards. The  employment  of  salting,  pressing,  and  packing  the  fish,  fully  engages  the 
hands  of  all  the  men,  women,  and  children  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  from  the  first 
appearance  of  a  shoal  at  sea,  to  its  final  consignment  to  the  casks,  there  is  one  tumultuous 
scene  of  action  and  bustle ;  and  all  this  in  the  service  of  the  belly ;  in  the  fulfilment  of  the 
"  great  law  of  eat  and  be  eaten/' 

We  were  at  St.  Ives  at  the  time  when  the  American  sloop  of  war,  the  Argus,  was  in 
the  Bristol  channel,  where  she  was  so  long  permitted  to  indulge  in  the  uninterrupted 
exercise  of  burning  and  pillaging  our  defenceless  merchantmen.  She  destroyed  two  vessels 

belonging 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  15 

belonging  to  this  port ;  and  the  owner  of  one  of  them  feelingly  represented  to  us  the  rarity 
of  British  cruisers  in  the  channel.  We  heard  too,  with  great  indignation,  that  volunteers 
from  our  own  coast  supplied  our  American  enemy  with  seamen  whenever  he  wanted  them, 
and  that  however  he  diminished  his  natural  crew  by  manning  his  prizes,  he  was  secure,  as 
long  as  he  remained  near  our  shores,  of  preserving  his  ship's  complement  entire.  The 
Argus  was  afterwards  taken  by  the  Pelican,  sloop  of  war,  after  a  short  action,  in  which  the 
Americans  evinced  neither  skill  nor  courage.  They  had  previously  inflated  themselves 
into  a  sense  of  perfect  security,  and  affected  to  despise  nothing  so  much  as  an  English 
sloop ;  therefore,  when  the  Pelican  was  approaching,  they  "  laid  to"  for  her  with  great 
steadiness,  confident  either  of  sinking  or  taking  her.  During  the  action  half  of  their  crew 
were  drunk,  and  very  speedily  signified  their  incompetence  to  do  any  thing  but  strike. 

About  three  miles  from  St.  Ives  stand  the  town,  the  copper  works,  and  smelting  houses 
of  Heyl.  They  are  situated  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river  Heyl,  which,  from  its  spring, 
near  Crowan,  pursues  a  westerly  course  to  St.  Hilary,  and  from  thence  flows  directly  to 
the  north,  till  it  forms  an  estuary,  which  opens  into  the  bay  of  St.  Ives.  The  communica- 
tion of  this  river  with  the  sea  is  obstructed  by  an  immense  bank  of  sand  which  has  accu- 
mulated near  its  mouth,  and  increases  so  rapidly,  that  there  seems  reason  to  apprehend 
that  it  will  ultimately  lay  an  irreversible  embargo  on  any  intermixture  of  the  fresh  water 
with  the  salt.  Vessels  only  of  one  hundred  tons  can  pass  over  the  bar  at  high  spring  tides, 
and  they  can  only  advance  a  mile  inwards  from  the  sea,  to  the  little  village  of  Lelant. 
Near  its  mouth  the  Heyl  is  joined  by  a  small  stream  from  the  east,  which,  under  the 
church  of  Philac,  forms  a  branch  of  the  haven  for  small  craft.  The  bed  of  the  whole  river 
has  been  so  much  raised  by  a  continual  accretion  of  sand,  tfyat  Heyl  is  become  only  a  half- 
tide  harbour :  the  sea  does  not  enter  it  till  half-flood,  and  has  entirely  disappeared  at 
half-ebb.  There  is  a  considerable  trade  at  this  port ;  the  imports  consisting  principally  of 
Welsh  coal  for  the  steam-engines  and  smelting  houses,  and  the  exports  of  copper.  As  far 
as  expediency  is  a  source  of  beauty,  Heyl,  with  its  copper  works,  and  steam-engines,  and 
furnaces,  may  claim  some  attention ;  and  even  in  the  gloom  of  its  poisonous  atmosphere 
one  may  see  with  pleasure  the  nice  adaptation  of  certain  means  for  the  production  of 
certain  results,  and  a  general  hurly-burly  of  fire  and  smoke  end  in  serviceable  blocks  of 
copper.  In  a  picturesque  point  of  view  it  is  quite  untractable ;  surrounded  on  all  sides 
with  barren  sands,  and  not  embellished  with  one  patch  of  green,  or  with  a  single  tree.  We 
observed  the  same  scarcity  of  trees  on  the  whole  coast  of  Cornwall,  and  as  far  inland  as 
we  could  see.  It  is  occasioned  by  the  westerly  wind,  which  passing  over  a  vast  extent  of 
sea,  comes  unmixed  and  untempered  to  this  coast,  and  blighting  as  it  blows,  extirpates, 
root  and  branch,  every  tree  and  shrub  that  oppose  it.  The  westerly  wind  is  more  preva- 
lent and  more  boisterous  than  any  other.  Dr.  Johnson  observed  that  he  had  travelled 
two  hundred  miles  in  Scotland,  and  seen  only  one  tree  not  younger  than  himself:  we 
travelled  at  least  half  that  distance  in  Cornwall,  and  saw  only  three  not  shorter  than 

ourselves. 


16  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

ourselves.  The  pernicious  effect  of  the  salt  wind  was  strikingly  evidenced  in  a  few  stumps 
which  we  saw  coaxed  up  under  the  lee  of  a  wall,  and  which  could  not  raise  their  heads  an 
inch  above  it,  but  were  shaved  as  flat  as  with  a  scythe,  and  all  of  equal  height,  or  just  as 
high  as  the  wall.  If,  encouraged  by  an  unusual  duration  of  a  land-breeze,  an  aspiring 
twig  or  a  vagrant  leaf  should  peep  above  the  allotted  level,  it  would  inevitably  be  cut  off 
by  the  first  breath  from  the  sea,  and  the  whole  be  again  reduced  to  its  former  mop-like 
smugness  and  uniformity.  Groves  regulated  into  this  state  of  methodical  distortion  would 
scarcely  be  worthy  of  preservation,  did  they  not  answer  the  purpose  of  at  once  explaining 
to  travellers  the  true  causes  of  the  dearth  of  more  stately  trees,  and  of  securing  the  inha- 
bitants from  any  share  of  reproach. 

Round  the  whole  bay  of  St.  Ives  the  coast  is  of  a  much  milder  character  than  that  to 
the  westward  of  it :  the  cliffs  are  not  so  high  nor  so  rugged,  and  not  composed  entirely  of 
rock,  but  mixed  with  a  large  proportion  of  sandy  earth.  All  bays,  indeed,  are  formed 
where  the  land  is  low  or  consists  of  soft  materials,  which  are  unable  to  resist  the  force  of 
the  sea.  Where  the  land  is  high  and  defended  by  impregnable  rocks  there  are,  of  course, 
no  bays.  In  those  of  any  considerable  extent  the  bottom  is  usually  of  sand,  which  is 
nothing  more  than  the  spoils  of  the  surrounding  land,  washed  down  by  the  action  of  the 
sea.  This  sand,  triturated  into  small  particles,  is  again  returned  by  the  sea  upon  the  shore, 
where  it  is  dried  by  the  sun,  and  then  scattered  by  the  wind  over  its  parent  earth,  carrying 
ruin  and  desolation  before  it.  It  is  likewise  thrown  up  into  bars  or  embankments  at  the 
mouths  of  havens,  where,  if  it  prevent  the  further  aggressions  of  its  old  enemy  the  sea,  it 
at  the  same  time  unfortunately  impedes  the  access  of  vessels,  for  they  and  the  water  must 
enter  a  harbour  together.  Though  these  embankments  are  composed  of  the  same  sand 
which  so  readily  crumbles  from  the  cliffs,  yet,  by  being  always  wet,  they  are  more  firmly 
bound  together,  and,  indeed,  become  perfectly  immoveable. 

At  the  eastern  extremity  of  St.  Ives  bay  is  a  small  island,  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
from  the  mainland,  called  Godreyvy  Island.  There  is  nothing  remarkable  about  it,  except 
its  being  at  all,  and  its  being  where  it  is.  All  who  have  seen  it  have,  from  time  imme- 
morial, expressed  themselves  in  these  terms :  "  Ay,  there  it  is ;  and  how  did  it  get  there  ?" 
I  shall  not  disturb  the  prescriptive  tranquillity  of  this  venerable  query  by  any  attempt  at 
a  reply.  About  a  mile  and  a  half  further  from  the  land  are  some  dangerous  rocks,  just 
above  water,  called  the  Stones ;  they  lie  directly  in  the  track  of  navigation,  and  many 
vessels  have  at  various  times  been  wrecked  upon  them.  And  here  end  the  memorabilia 
of  St.  Ives  bay. 

It  had  been  our  wish,  for  the  sake  of  variety  and  a  little  relief  from  the  fatigue  of 
walking,  to  hire  a  boat  at  St.  Ives,  and  so  proceed  for  a  few  hours  on  our  course.  This  wish 
was  opposed  by  the  extravagant  demands  of  the  boatmen,  who  did  not  think  that  they 
were  doing  themselves  justice,  unless  they  indemnified  themselves  for  withdrawing  for  a 
day  from  their  usual  business,  by  charging  us  more  than  they  could  have  earned  by  that 

business 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  17 

business  in  a  week.  The  pilchard  fishery  had  put  a  few  shillings  into  their  pockets,  so  that 
they  could  afford  to  be  insolent,  and  affected  a  most  galling  indifference  whether  they 
obliged  us  or  not.  During  our  whole  voyage  we  found  in  all  boatmen  the  same  disposi- 
tion to  extortion,  combined  with  a  certain  hardihood  and  independence  of  manner,  which 
is  inseparable  from  a  seaman,  and  is  strikingly  contrasted  with  the  servile  knavery  of  the 
Jew,  who  demands  for  his  goods  what  he  pleases,  and  takes  what  you  please.  The  boat- 
men never  condescended  to  flatter,  but  cheated  us  with  an  air  of  assurance  that  was  almost 
respectable.  They  are  a  fine,  bold  set  of  fellows,  and  as  their  common  occupation  of  fish- 
ing, laborious  and  perilous  as  it  is,  returns  them  but  a  scanty  subsistence,  they  may, 
perhaps,  be  excused  for  now  and  then  hooking  a  stray  gentleman  who  comes  in  their  way, 
and  who,  they  suppose,  travels  from  his  home  for  the  express  purpose  of  scattering  his 
money  about  him  with  heedless  profusion.  But  as  our  object  in  travelling  was  not  of  this 
loose  description,  we  resolved  to  decline  the  hook,  till  more  imperious  circumstances  should 
actually  drive  us  into  the  water.  The  boat  with  which  the  fishermen  had  proposed  to 
accommodate  us,  they  called  a  gig,  an  article  which  most  of  my  readers  might  recognize 
under  many  forms  and  many  titles,  but  which  few  would  expect  to  find  breasting  the 
billows  of  the  Atlantic.  We  could  not  procure  single  horses  sufficient  for  ourselves  and 
our  materiel,  and  this  sea-gig  first  suggested  to  us  the  plan  of  having  recourse  to  that  vehicle 
which  runs  over  the  stones  and  fears  no  squalls,  the  plain,  familiar  land-gig.  Having  obtained 
one,  with  a  horse  to  boot,  and  having  ascertained  that  we  could  follow  a  by-road  which 
skirted  the  coast,  we  took  our  seats,  and,  in  the  laziest  sense  of  the  word,  flew  over  the 
ground  that  I  have  already  described ;  had  a  race  against  the  tide  over  the  sands  at  Heyl, 
in  which  we  just  saved  our  distance,  and  soon  turned  our  backs  upon  St.  Ives  bay  and  all 
that  it  contains. 

At  the  eastern  point  of  the  bay  the  coast  again  and  at  once  resumes  all  its  former 
boldness  and  sublimity,  and  from  thence  runs  to  the  north-east  in  a  grand  and  broken  line, 

"  Monstrum,  horrendum,  informe,  ingens" — 

frowning  defiance  on  the  waves  that  are  continually  thundering  at  its  base.  The  rocks 
are  of  black  killas,  and  in  much  larger  fragments  than  the  blocks  of  granite  at  the  Land's- 
End.  Their  deep  colour  adds  great  solemnity  to  the  coast,  and  is  well  opposed  to  the 
white  foam  of  the  sea  which  dashes  against  them.  A  variety  of  coasting  vessels,  which  we 
saw  in  the  channel,  meeting,  following,  and  crossing  one  another ;  some  facing  the  sea  and 
casting  it  in  spangles  from  their  bows,  some  steering  before  it  and  leaving  a  stream  of  light 
behind,  softened  the  immensity  of  the  ocean,  and  gave  it  life  and  beauty. 

I  ought  to  apologize,  perhaps,  for  calling  the  attention  of  the  reader  from  a  scene  of 
this  imposing  character  to  one  of  a  very  humble  nature.  Our  gig  had  been  on  very  in- 
different terms  with  the  by-road  from  the  outset,  and  after  a  succession  of  ominous  cracks 
from  various  parts  of  its  machinery,  which  had  not  escaped  our  ears,  a  general  break  up 
of  its  whole  constitution  supervened,  and  wheels,  and  springs,  and  shafts,  all  fell,  in  one 

wide 


18  VOYAGE    ROUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

•wide  ruin,  to  the  ground.  Our  great  consolation  under  this  misfortune  was,  that  we  were 
not  more  than  half  a  mile  from  hammers  and  help.  We  therefore  walked  on,  and  speedily 
arrived  at  Portreath,  where  new  objects  occupied  our  minds,  and  diverted  them  from  any 
painful  thoughts  about  our  late  overthrow.  Portreath  has  a  few  small  houses,  scattered 
about  in  a  valley  between  two  lofty  hills,  and  is  scarcely  to  be  dignified  with  the  name  of 
a  town,  for  it  has  no  pretensions  to  a  street,  and  in  very  few  instances  has  one  house  ad- 
joining another.  It  is,  nevertheless,  a  place  of  considerable  bustle  and  business,  and  has  a 
harbour,  which  is  always  crowded  with  vessels,  that  bring  coals  to  it  from  Swansea  and 
Neath,  and  return  with  copper  and  tin  ore.  The  quay  is  thronged  with  men  and  mules, 
in  a  state  of  equal  and  incessant  action,  clearing  the  colliers ;  all  equally  patient  of  labour 
and  dirt.  The  harbour  is  defended  by  a  pier,  which  was  commenced  in  the  year  1760 : 
the  expences  of  building  it  amounted  to  1200/. ;  6000/.  have  been  since  laid  out  in  forming 
an  interior  bason,  and  the  trade  carried  on  here  has  fully  justified  the  whole  of  this  great 
expenditure.  The  entrance  of  the  harbour  is  singularly  frightful,  and  has  an  air  of  pre- 
posterousness  and  grotesque  inexpediency  about  it,  very  striking  to  those  who  have  always 
considered  a  harbour  as  obviously  presenting  a  place  of  shelter  and  security  for  ships. 
One  side  is  formed  by  the  pier,  and  the  other  by  the  jagged  rocks.  The  mouth  is  so  nar- 
row that  two  vessels  could  not  possibly  enter  it  abreast.  In  bad  weather  a  vessel  goes 
through  a  most  tremendous  trial  that  approaches  it,  for  she  comes  within  two  or  three  yards 
of  rocks,  which  if  she  touches  she  is  lost,  and  if  she  does  not  answer  the  helm  with  the 
utmost  nicety,  or  if  she  is  thrown  by  an  unexpected  sea  at  all  out  of  her  course,  the  con- 
sequences must  be  fatal.  While  we  were  standing  on  the  pier-head  we  saw  a  small  brig 
running  for  the  harbour,  and  though  the  weather  was  moderate,  we  could  not  see  her,  even 
wilfully,  advance  towards  the  rocks,  without  a  sense  of  anxiety  and  breathlessness.  She 
came  in,  however,  as  her  captain  told  us,  most  charmingly,  and  indeed,  from  long  expe- 
rience, knew  the  way  in  as  well  as  he  did.  "  She  is  as  sweet  a  little  thing,  sir,  as  ever  I 
put  my  foot  on  board,  and  will  do  any  thing  but  talk/'  When  a  vessel  of  only  eighty  tons 
will  do  all  this,  what  are  rocks  ? 

In  gales  of  wind  from  the  north-west  a  very  heavy  sea  rolls  into  the  harbour.  Mr. 
Bath,  a  gentleman  resident  at  Portneath,  informed  us,  that  a  few  years  ago  he  and  four 
other  men  were  washed  off  the  pier-head,  while  in  preparation  to  give  assistance  to  a  boat 
coming  in,  by  a  gigantic  sea  that  suddenly  rose  to  the  height  of  fifty  feet.  All  were  drowned 
except  Mr.  Bath,  who  was  extricated  by  means  of  ropes,  after  a  struggle  of  fifteen  minutes, 
during  which  he  was  shockingly  bruised  and  mangled  against  the  rocks.  And  what 
became  of  the  boat?  it  will  certainly  be  asked.  It  fortunately  entered  the  pier  during, 
what  seamen  call,  a  smooth,  and  was  saved.  In  all  the  confusion  of  a  storm  there  is  a 
singular  regularity  in  the  action  of  the  sea :  three  enormous  waves  follow  one  another 
in  succession,  after  which  there  is  a  pause.  Boatmen,  when  they  launch  their  boats 
from  a  beach  through  a  surf,  always  wait  till  the  three  great  waves  have  passed,  and 

then 


The  entrance  to  Portreath,  Cornwall 


Boscastle  Pier  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  19 

then  push  off,  and  get  through  the  broken  water  before  the  sea  has  again  collected  his 
might. 

On  a  height  commanding  the  harbour  there  is  a  battery  of  a  few  guns,  but  there  are 
no  gunners,  and  neither  powder  nor  ball.  In  the  last  American  war  a  privateer  had  the 
audacity  to  come  in  and  capture  a  vessel  at  the  harbour's  mouth,  in  consequence  of  which 
it  was  thought  prudent  to  establish  this  little  fort  in  terrorem.  No  privateers  have  since 
ventured  within  range  of  its  harmless  and  frugal  guns. 

Portreath,  in  all  its  parts,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  art,  still  preserves  an  appearance 
so  savage  and  unhewn,  that  it  furnishes  a  most  satisfactory  specimen  of  the  wildest  of  the 
wilds  of  Cornwall.  A  few  chimneys  and  a  little  smoke  give  it  a  slight  air  of  improvement, 
but  nature  has  cast  it  in  so  uncouth  a  mould,  that  it  can  never  be  altogether  tamed,  or 
chiselled  and  planed  into  forms  of  comfort  and  regularity.  The  harbour,  though  entirely 
artificial,  has  so  unaccommodating  an  exterior  that  it  rather  adds  to  the  general  stock  of 
native  wildness.  At  the  distance  of  four  or  five  hundred  yards  from  its  mouth  there  is  an 
immense  crag,  two  hundred  feet  high,  called  the  Gull  Rock,  reigning  lord  of  the  terrors  of 
this  dismal  place.  Through  the  civility  of  Mr.  Bath  we  procured  a  boat,  and  landing  on 
this  rock,  scrambled  up  it,  amidst  the  screams  of  numberless  gulls  and  other  sea  birds 
that  sit  in  conclave  on  it,  and  are  not  often  disturbed  in  their  meditations  by  animals  in 
coats  and  breeches.  From  the  top  we  had  a  commanding  view  of  a  line  of  coast  extending 
many  miles,  and  certainly  no  language  of  mine  can  do  justice  to  its  savage  grandeur  and 
magnificence.  The  cliffs  are  hollowed  into  deep,  dark  caverns,  and  split  and  torn  into 
fragments  of  every  form  of  ruggedness,  and  all  on  a  scale  of  magnitude,  that  makes  every 
cavern  and  every  rock  in  the  long  perspective,  distinct  and  terrible.  At  intervals  are  lofty 
headlands  stretching  far  into  the  sea,  and  opposite  to  these,  islands  of  rock  raising  their 
bare  peaks  above  the  waves — fit  thrones  for  the  spirits  of  danger  and  storms.  These 
islands  are  very  numerous ;  some  of  them  are  of  great  size,  and  all  of  barren  rock.  It  is 
supposed  that  they  were  once  connected  with  the  mainland,  and  if  so,  they  must  have 
been  separated,  not  by  the  silent  encroachments  and  slow  depredations  of  the  sea,  but  by 
some  sudden  convulsion  of  nature.  The  character  of  the  general  coast  strongly  favours 
the  conjecture  of  its  having  been  once  shattered  by  an  earthquake. 

After  having  sole  possession  of  the  Gull  Rock  for  an  hour  or  two,  we  yielded  it 
again  to  the  dominion  of  the  gulls,  who  during  the  whole  term  of  our  invasion  had 
persisted  in  a  strain  of  the  most  violent  and  unceasing  denunciation.  The  interposition 
of  Mr.  Bath  had  softened,  in  a  degree,  the  covetousness  of  the  boatmen,  and  they 
agreed  to  engage  themselves  in  our  service  as  long  as  we  pleased,  at  a  rate  of  decent 
and  tolerable  extortion.  On  our  part  there  was  no  wish  to  be  unreasonable,  so  that  if 
we  did  not  exactly  jump  at  their  terms,  we  at  least  jumped  into  their  boat,  though  still 
not  without  some  unpleasant  associations,  for  it  was  a  gig.  A  gig,  or  galley,  is  a  long, 
narrow  boat,  built  purposely  for  rowing,  very  sharp  at  the  head  and  stern,  and  worked  by 

D  four, 


20  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

four,  six,  and  sometimes  eight  oars.  It  cuts  through  the  water  with  great  velocity,  but  is 
not  quite  so  secure  as  it  is  rapid.  No  person  who  has  determined  to  die  on  shore  should 
trust  himself  in  one,  except  in  fine  weather  and  smooth  water. 

We  now  steered  to  the  N.  N.  E.,  for  so  the  coast  runs,  and  stared  so  long  at  black 
rocks,  hideous  caverns,  and  foaming  surfs,  and  made  such  ample  use  of  every  word  at  all 
allied  in  signification  to  the  terms  frightful  and  sublime,  that  we  were  at  length  compelled 
to  sit  noteless  and  silent ;  a  state  of  repose  rather  soothing  than  otherwise,  to  people  who 
had  really  nothing  more  either  to  see  or  to  say.  This  pleasing  pause  did  not  last  long,  for 
we  were  soon  roused  by  the  information  that  we  had  arrived  at  another  port,  St.  Agnes. 
There  was  no  water  in  the  harbour,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to  land  on  the  rocks.  The 
cliffs  above  us  were  strangely  shattered,  and  hollowed  into  innumerable  cavities  by  the 
best  of  all  hole-makers,  excepting  the  sea,  the  Cornish  miners.  Through  these  holes,  our 
captain  assured  us,  that  we  could  readily  grope  our  way  to  the  top  of  the  cliff.  We  ad- 
vanced boldly  to  the  task,  and  scrambled  on  through  a  labyrinth  of  gaps  and  hollows, 
which  speedily  led  to  a  candid  and  mutual  acknowledgment  that  we  were  ignorant  whither 
we  were  going.  We  roared  out  and  summoned  one  of  the  boatmen  to  our  assistance,  Avho 
came  and  assured  us  that  we  were  perfectly  right,  and  could  not  possibly  miss  our  way : 
he  then  led  us  through  a  new  maze  of  dark  turnings  and  windings,  which  brought  us  out 
at  the  top  of  the  cliff,  though  I  cannot,  to  this  hour,  more  clearly  explain  how.  From  the 
station  to  which  we  had  been  thus  unaccountably  elevated,  we  had  a  very  good  view  of 
all  that  St.  Agnes  presents  to  captivate  the  eye.  The  land  about  it  is  lofty,  and  there  is 
one  height,  called  the  Beacon,  which  is  computed  to  be  nearly  six  hundred  feet  from  the 
level  of  the  sea,  and  to  be  one  of  the  highest  hills  in  Cornwall.  Here,  as  at  Portreath,  a 
ruggedness  not  to  be  ameliorated,  is  the  character  of  the  whole  scene.  There  are  a  few 
houses  which  proclaim  defiance  to  every  appearance  of  comfort  and  convenience,  a  few 
inclosures,  called  gardens,  in  which  even  weeds  disdain  to  grow,  and  a  few  other  things  for 
the  service  of  man,  in  the  same  whimsical  style  of  unfitness.  In  the  whole  prospect  there 
was  not  one  feature  of  gracefulness  or  beauty :  all  was  wild,  barren,  and  bare.  Such  a 
prospect  could  not  detain  us  long,  we  therefore  descended  from  our  eminence,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  inquire  more  minutely  into  what  there  Was  worthy  of  observation.  The  harbour 
is  very  insignificant,  and  so  choked  up  with  sand  thai  it  can  admit  no  vessels  of  more  than 
eighty  tons.  It  was  formerly  of  more  importance,  and  was  protected  by  a  good  pier,  which 
was  entirely  destroyed,  during  a  gale  of  wind,  by  an  overwhelming  irruption  of  the  sea. 

The  country  about  St.  Agnes  is  particularly  rich  in  tin  and  copper  mines,  and  these 
furnish  the  only  inducements  that  could  have  tempted  any  human  beings  to  settle  near  it. 
AVe  encountered  a  large  body  of  miners,  who  had  just  "  come  up  to  grass,"  as  they  express 
themselves,  or  come  up  from  the  mine,  and  whose  manners  betrayed  strong  evidences  of 
having  been  formed  at  least  twenty  fathoms  below  the  surface  of  the  earth.  They  have  a 
very  unhealthy  appearance,  which  is  easily  accounted  for.  It  is  calculated  that  one-half 

of 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  2i 

of  the  population  employed  in  the  mines  is  swept  off  by  a  peculiar  kind  of  consumption, 
distinct  from  the  common  pulmonary  consumption,  and  resulting  from  exposure  to  bad 
air,  and  sudden  and  violent  changes  in  its  temperature.  My  authority,  on  this  subject,  is 
Mr.  Polwhele,  who,  in  his  "  History  of  Cornwall,  in  respect  to  the  health,  &c.  of  its  in- 
habitants," has  described  very  circumstantially  the  symptoms  of  this  disease,  and  pointed 
out  those  in  which  it  differs  from  the  common  consumption.  Instances  of  sudden  suffoca- 
tion are  very  frequent  in  the  mines,  in  which  there  are  many  varieties  of  foul  air,  that 
occasion  death  with  equal  certainty,  but  with  very  different  degrees  of  suffering.  The  two 
following  cases,  in  which  life  appears  to  have  been,  even  slowly,  destroyed  without  the 
struggle  of  a  moment,  I  have  quoted  from  Mr.  Polwhele.  "  In  the  mine  of  North  Ddwns 
a  drift  end  was  in  driving,  where  the  air  was  scarce  known  to  be  scanty :  one  evening,  at 
the  usual  hour  of  relief,  an  elderly  man,  called  Bamfield,  and  a  boy,  came  to  the  mine  and 
went  down  to  their  place,  from  whence  the  other  workmen  had  just  come.  Some  time 
after  the  next  hour  of  relief  was  elapsed,  their  partners  were  surprised  that  Bamfield  and 
the  boy  did  not  come  above  ground.  After  Availing  a  little  longer  they  went  down,  and 
found  the  boy  in  a  recumbent  posture;  and  Bamfield  close  to  the  end,  sitting  upon  the 
ground  with  both  hands  to  his  forehead,  and  his  elbows  resting  on  his  knees,  in  a  kind  of 
sleepy,  nodding  attitude ;  but  both  of  them  cold  and  stiff/'  This  man  and  boy  seem  to 
have  died  without  any  pain  or  convulsion ;  to  have  sunk  down  as  if  under  the  oppression 
of  mere  drowsiness.  Their  end  was  an  enviable  one ;  and  yet,  to  those  who  first  discovered 
them,  death,  contrasted  as  it  was  with  the  familiar  resemblances  of  life  and  sense,  must 
have  appeared  with  a  more  than  common  horror  and  ghastliness  about  it.  There  is  some- 
thing more  tragical  in  the  circumstances  of  the  next  fatal  story,  as  death  was  preceded  by 
a  conviction  of  danger.  "  The  neighbourhood  of  St.  Dye  was  a  few  years  since  deprived 
of  a  most  valuable  character,  in  the  loss  of  Captain  Harvey,  by  an  accident  of  this  kind. 
Accompanied  by  one  of  his  men,  he  had  proceeded  to  examine  a  drift  or  adit,  and  in 
his  passage  forward  placed,  as  is  the  usual  custom,  several  large  candles  against  the  walls. 
His  zeal  rendered  him  too  adventurous,  and  carried  him  too  far ;  so  that  on  his  return  he 
found  the  candles  extinguished,  and  began  to  feel  embarrassed.  He  had,  however,  reached 
the  entrance  of  the  drift,  within  a  few  yards,  when,  at  the  moment  of  rallying  his  com- 
panion, who  was  faint,  he  fell,  and  brought  him  to  the  ground  with  him.  Nothing  was 
heard  of  them  for  an  hour,  when  suspicion  of  an  accident  led  to  a  search.  They  were  both 
found  apparently  dead ;  the  man  under,  with  his  mouth  close  to  a  small  rivulet,  and 
Captain  Harvey  upon  him.  Every  method  of  resuscitation  was  employed.  Captain 
Harvey  was  irrecoverably  lost,  but  the  man  soon  shewed  signs  of  life,  and  recovered  ; 
owing,  most  probably,  his  salvation  to  the  circumstance  of  his  mouth  being  so  near  the 
rivulet,  by  which  he  was  either  prevented  from  inhaling  the  destructive  air,  or  was  provided 
with  a  small  supply  of  atmospheric  air,  accompanying  the  running  stream.  The  author 
of  this  information  had  an  opportunity  of  feeling  this  man's  pulse  some  days  after,  when 

it 


22  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

it  was  still  so  slow  as  forty.  The  suspension  of  life  he  had  undergone  he  described  as 
extremely  easy,  rather  pleasant,  like  going  to  sleep."  Bad  air  is  not  the  only  enemy  to 
which  the  miners  are  exposed,  for  they  work  from  day  to  day  in  constant  danger  of  being 
crushed  or  maimed  by  fragments  of  rock,  which  fall  from  the  top  and  sides  of  the  cavities 
in  the  mines ;  and  still  they  appear  as  happy  and  contented  as  any  other  body  of  men. 
The  hope  of  high  wages  forms  the  first  inducement  that  tempts  them  to  this  hazardous 
employment,  and  when  once  engaged,  habit  soon  renders  them  careless  of  their  insecurity, 
and  they  forget  that  they  are  toiling  for  the  comforts  of  life  in  the  very  face  of  death. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Agnes  there  are  the  remains  of  an  entrenchment  of  vast 
magnitude ;  two  miles  in  length,  and  inclosing  two  thousand  acres  of  ground.  It  is  decided 
by  antiquarians  to  have  been  of  Roman  construction  ;  but  the  popular  opinion  in  these 
parts  is,  that  it  was  executed  by  the  single  hands  of  the  giant  Bolster.  The  work  has  been 
much  defaced ;  the  ditch  widened  in  some  places  and  filled  up  in  others,  for  the  conve- 
nience of  gardens  ;  the  vallum  levelled  to  make  room  for  houses  ;  both  ditch  and  vallum 
disfigured  by  tin-mines ;  and,  in  short,  the  whole  so  much  abused  by  a  variety  of  modern 
improvements,  all  made  with  a  barbarous  heedlessness  of  its  original  purposes,  and  all 
subversive  of  its  form  and  character,  that  one  must  be  well  versed  in  the  theory  of  Roman 
fortifications  to  discover  any  regular  plan  in  the  present  motley  mixture  of  ancient  and 
modern  ingenuity.  For  my  own  part  I  could  not  by  any  means  distinguish  the  labours  of 
the  two  eras,  and  after  a  most  wearisome  effort,  to  fix  precisely  the  limits  of  a  hog-sty,  of 
the  year  1806,  and  the  spot  where  the  old  ditch  recommenced,  I  was  obliged  to  give  up 
the  point,  and  leave  the  pigs  to  root  it  out  by  themselves.  Dr.  Borlase,  in  spite  of  the 
disguises  under  which  it  is  at  present  seen,  was  able  to  detect  in  this  great  work  sufficient 
evidences  of  skilfulness  in  design  and  execution,  to  convince  him  that  it  could  have  been 
constructed  by  none  but  the  Romans.  If  any  of  my  readers  are  desirous  of  more  minute 
information  about  these  evidences,  I  should  refer  them  to  Dr.  Borlase's  account,  rather 
than  to  the  actual  remains  that  are  now  visible.  Before  I  quit  St.  Agnes  I  must  not  omit 
to  mention,  that,  mean  as  it  is  at  present,  it  had  the  distinction  of  its  name  from  a  Roman 
saint,  a  lady  of  high  birth,  and  great  beauty  and  accomplishments.  After  being  miracu- 
lously preserved  in  many  trials,  which  aimed  both  at  her  life  and  her  honour,  she  was  at 
length  subdued  by  her  enemies  and  beheaded,  in  the  year  304*. 

*  "  Tliis  saint  was  a  Roman  by  birth,  descended  of  noble  ancestors,  and  being  beautiful  of  body  and  mind,  at 
thirteen  years  was  courted  in  marriage  by  the  son  of  Sempronius,  then  governor  of  Rome ;  but,  because  he  was  no  Christian, 
she  utterly  refused  his  addresses  :  on  which  his  father  sent  for  Agnes,  and  renewed  the  proposals  of  marriage  made  to  her 
by  his  win,  making  larger  offers  for  her  advantage.  This  altogether  proving  ineffectual,  Sempronius  asked  her  whether  she 
would  sacrifice  to  the  Roman  gods,  and  abandon  the  superstition  of  the  Christians  ?  But  she,  proving  constant  to  her 
religion,  was  committed  to  prison;  and  thence,  after  much  hard  durance,  sent  naked  to  the  brothel-house,  where  her 
innocence  and  purity  were  miraculously  preserved,  till  at  length,  by  the  governor's  order,  she  was  committed  to  the  flames, 
which  immediately  parted  asunder  and  did  her  no  harm.  Then  the  governor  Auspitius,  his  agent,  commanded  her  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  tire,  and  forthwith  to  be  beheaded  by  the  common  hangman,  20  Jan.  A.  D.  304."— Hals,  p.  3. 

We 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  23 

We  proceeded  from  hence  in  our  boat,  and  as  we  were  leaving  the  harbour  a  point  in 
the  cliffs  was  shewn  us,  from  Avhich  a  poor  man  and  his  wife,  both  very  old  people,  had 
fallen  a  few  days  before,  while  employed  in  gathering  samphire.  The  man  had  been  heard 
by  some  people  who  were  above  him,  beseeching  his  wife  to  be  cautious  where  she  fixed 
her  feet,  for  that  the  rocks  appeared  to  be  loose  and  insecure.  A  few  seconds  after  this 
vain  warning  a  rock  on  which  he  himself  stood  gave  way,  and  in  its  descent  struck  his 
wife,  who  was  below  him  :  they  were  both  precipitated  to  the  bottom  from  a  height  of 
nearly  three  hundred  feet,  and  both  killed  on  the  spot.  The  fame  of  this  melancholy  accident 
had  spread  wide  through  the  neighbourhood,  and  all  received  it  with  the  same  comment : 
that  it  was  a  blessing  that  two  people  who  had  lived  so  long  together,  should  die  at  the 
same  moment. 

A  projecting  point  soon  concealed  from  us  St.  Agnes  and  all  that  could  remind  us  of 
man,  and  left  us  again  amongst  our  old  companions,  the  rocks.  We  were  soon  abreast  of  two 
rocky  islands,  close  to  one  another,  and  nearly  a  mile  from  the  land,  called  Man  and  his 
Man.  Man  is  an  immense  crag,  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  height,  presenting  a  horrid 
precipice  on  all  sides ;  his  Man  is  only  distinguished  by  being  a  head  less  than  his  master. 
Both  of  them  are  covered  in  the  summer  time  with  sea  birds,  who  lay  their  eggs  and  hatch 
their  young  upon  them.  Our  captain  exclaimed,  "  Oh!  that  I  had  a  gun  that  1  might 
shoot  one  of  those  birds  \"  We  asked  him  why  he  wished  to  shoot  one,  and  he  was  still 
puzzling  for  a  motive,  with  a  face  strongly  expressive  of  nothing,  when  we  arrived  opposite 
to-another  island,  of  magnitude  superior  to  any  that  we  had  hitherto  seen.  This  we  were 
informed  was  called  Carter's  Rock.  A  little  further  ahead  we  perceived  another,  which  is 
called  the  Goose.  I  can  do  little  more  than  recite  the  names  of  these  insulated  rocks  ;  and 
the  names  certainly  convey  no  sound  to  the  ear,  and  no  signification  to  the  mind,  that 
abound  with  intelligence.  They  give  an  appearance  of  great  wildness  to  the  coast,  and 
atone  for  the  dangers  which  they  oppose  to  vessels  at  sea  by  acting  as  breakwaters,  which 
protect  the  creeks  and  havens  along  shore.  Round  all  of  them  there  is  at  all  times  a  rapid 
tide,  and  a  confused  and  tumbling  sea ;  but  here  I  can  only  relate  the  fact,  for  all  informa- 
tion as  to  the  cause  was  denied  to  my  enquiries.  There  is  not  only  an  increased  current 
of  tide  between  the  islands  and  the  mainland,  but  also  at  a  considerable  distance  to  seaward 
of  them,  and  the  confusion  in  the  motion  of  the  sea  extends  far  beyond  the  influence  of  the 
waves  which  recoil  from  the  rocks.  There  are  instances  of  a  similar  irregularity  in  the 
action  of  the  tides  and  sea  in  many  other  parts  of  our  coast,  for  which  it  is  as  difficult  to 
assign  a  cause.  Portland  Race  is  the  most  striking  singularity  that  I  have  seen,  where, 
without  any  variation  in  the  depth  of  water,  or  in  the  surface  of  the  bottom,  the  sea 
is  suddenly  thrown  into  a  ferment,  as  if  it  boiled  ;  where,  for  two  or  three  miles,  it  roars, 
and  leaps,  and  dashes,  and  foams,  with  waves  meeting  arid  flanking  waves,  as  if  it  blew  a 
hurricane  from  every  point  in  the  compass.  With  a  flood-tide  and  a  storm  of  wind  from 

the 


24  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  east,  in  which  case  the  wind  opposes  the  tide,  there  is  a  sea  in  the  Race  which  would 
bury  a  first-rate  ship  of  the  line. 

When  we  had  passed  Carter's  Rock  we  turned  our  boat's  head  towards  the  land,  and 
entered  the  Ganal  Creek,  where  a  narrow  arm  of  the  sea  runs  inland  about  two  miles,  and 
is  joined  by  a  small  river,  which  rises  in  the  parish  of  Newlyn,  near  Trerice.  This  creek 
was  formerly  more  considerable  than  it  is  at  present,  but  has  received  a  more  than  common 
share  of  the  mischief  that  pervades  every  haven  on  the  Cornish  coast,  and  is  so  blocked 
up  by  the  sand  forced  into  it  by  storms  from  the  north  and  west,  that  it  cannot  admit 
vessels  of  more  than  thirty  tons.  Near  the  mouth  of  the  Ganal  there  is  a  little  village, 
called  Carantoc,  which,  like  other  places  inhabited  only  by  the  poor,  is  mean  and  dirty. 
Here,  was  anciently  a  large  town,  and  a  collegiate  church,  dedicated  to  St.  Carantocus,  a 
disciple  of  St.  Patrick ;  and  here  too,  where  now  little  meets  the  eye  but  a  cheerless  desert 
of  sand,  once  stood  a  college,  which  could  boast  of  as  high  antiquity,  if  not  of  as  high  re-> 
pute,  as  any  college  at  Oxford*.  There  is  something  exceedingly  mournful  in  the  con- 
templation of  scenes  of  desolation,  which  learning  and  religion  once  combined  to  render 
illustrious,  where  once  flourished  colleges  and  cathedrals,  now  mouldered  into  dust.  At 
Carantoc,  once  peopled  by  students  and  professors,  once  the  seat  of  holy  eloquence  and 
meditation,  there  is  now  one  deep  silence,  or  nothing  heard  but  the  roaring  of  the  sea  and 
the  howling  of  the  wind.  As  its  honours  live  only  in  history,  we  did  not  pause  long  to 
examine  its  sands,  but  sailed  again  down  the  Ganal,  at  present  an  inglorious  stream,  though 
formerly,  perhaps,  (so  fancy  may  plead)  as  well  known  to  the  rnuses  as  the  Isis  and  the  Cam. 

It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  we  left  the  creek,  but  we  did  not  fear  the  night,  for 
the  wind  and  the  sea  were  now  still,  and  there  was  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky  from  which  to 
augur  mischief.  The  moon  shone  clear,  and  its  tender  light  played  on  the  water  and  illu- 
mined the  rocks,  distinctly  developing  every  point  and  angle  of  those  that  were  near  us, 
and  shadowing  out  the  distant  coast  so  that  the  eye  could  just  form  an  outline  for  the 

*  "  This  district,  at  the  time  of  the  Domesday,  was  taxed  under  the  name  of  Ryalton  or  Cargoll :  and  in  the  inquisition 
of  the  bishops  of  Lincoln  and  Winchester,  1294,  Ecclesia  Sancti  Carentini  in  Decan.  de  Pidre  is  thus  rated  ;  the  vicar  xk 
And  the  nine  prebends,  then  extant  in  this  church,  were  thus  taxed,  viz.  John  de  Woolrington,  liijs.  iiijd. ;  John  de  Caltelyn, 
xxxj.;  Nicholas  Strange,  xxxs. ;  John  de  Ingham,  Ixs. ;  Ralp  de  Trethinick,  liijs.  iiijd. ;  DaviddeMontoii.xls.;  William 
de  Patefond,  \\s. ;  John  Lovell,  xxxs.;  John  de  Glasney,  vis.  viijd.  In  all  19/.  3s.  4rf.  Whence  I  gather  this  collegiate 
church  had  great  revenues  then  belonging  to  it,  since  it  is  higher  rated  to  the  pope's  annat  than  any  other  church  in  Cornwall. 
The  first  endowed  college  for  scholars  in  England  (or  in  Europe,  as  Camden  saith)  was  Baliol  College  in  Oxford,  1260, 
next  Merton  College,  1274  ;  and  yet  he  contradicts  himself,  and  tells  us  that  there  was  a  college  of  priests  at  Launceston, 
or  St.  Stephens,  before  the  Norman  conquest,  another  at  St.  Germans,  founded  by  king  Canutus,  A.  D.  1020,  as  our 
chronologers  tell  us.  And  as  sure  I  am  there  was  another  at  St.  Neots  long  before;  also  another  at  Buryan,  A.  D.  930. 
And  to  speak  uprightly,  this  college  of  Crantock  may  pretend  to  as  much  antiquity  as  any  college  at  Oxford,  since  it  appears 
to  have  had  great  revenues  at  the  time  of  the  inquisition  before  mentioned,  1294,  though  it  hath  been  so  unfortunate  not  to 
liave  been  as  long  lived,  by  reason  of  the  great  quantities  of  sea-sand  blown  up  from  the  Gannell  Creek  by  the  wind,  as 
Hollitigslu  d  saith."— Hals,  p.  73. 

imasination 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  25 

imagination  to  fill  up.  All  was  silent  and  placid  in  the  vast  expanse  around  us,  and  we 
glided  on,  undisturbed  even  by  a  whisper  amongst  ourselves,  for  all  seemed  to  acknow- 
ledge the  charm  of  this  wide  tranquillity.  How  long  this  equal  temper  of  mind  might  have 
lasted  amongst  our  quiet  company,  under  the  same  circumstances  which  first  inspired  it, 
I  cannot  tell,  for  in  half  an  hour,  our  arrival  at  the  harbour  of  Newquay,  with  one  shock, 
alarmed  all  tongues,  and  old  Silence  was,  in  consequence,  entirely  bawled  out  of  the  boat. 
We,  of  course,  did  not  proceed  to  explore  Newquay  without  the  assistance  of  the  sun. 
The  town,  which  consists  of  thirty  huts,  perhaps,  exclusive  of  the  hotel-hut,  is  almost  a 
mile  from  the  harbour,  a  circumstance  which  we  could  not  prevail  upon  any  of  the  natives 
to  conceive  absurd,  though  they  all  readily  agreed,  that  the  town  was  built  by  the  first 
settlers  in  strict  subservience  to  the  convenience  of  the  harbour.  The  matter  was  not  of 
much  importance  to  us,  and  we  did  not  long  pursue  the  amusement  of  reasoning  with 
blocks,  merely  for  the  sake  of  argument.  The  men  of  Newquay  are  fishermen,  whose 
hopes  and  fears  in  life  are  all  of  pilchards:  the  women  are  principally  employed  in  frying 
the  fish  which  their  husbands  catch,  and  if  enough  are  caught,  and  they  are  fried  enough, 
there  remain  no  motives  for  altercation  between  them. 

The  names  of  most  towns  in  Cornwall  are  imperishable  records  of  times  and  events 
that  have  passed  away,  and  the  title  of  Newquay  explains  to  posterity  the  earliest  and 
most  memorable  fact  in  its  history.  Carew  observes,  "  Neither  may  I  omit  Newkaye,  so 
called,  because  in  former  times  the  neighbours  attempted  to  supplie  the  defect  of  nature 
by  art,  in  making  there  a  kay  for  the  rode  of  shipping,  which  conceyt  they  still  retain, 
though  want  of  means  in  themselves  or  the  place  have  left  the  effect  in  nubibus,  and  onely 
lent  them  the  benefit  of  lestercocks  and  fishing  boats."  Its  name  and  circumstances  are 
now  rendered  a  little  less  contradictory  by  a  rude  pier,  though  this  has  not  added  much 
to  its  commercial  appearance,  for  it  has  still  the  benefit  of  nothing  but  fishing  boats.  To 
the  westward  of  the  harbour  the  coast  runs  out  into  a  bold  and  lofty  promontory,  called 
Towan  Head,  which  shelters  the  bay  of  Newquay  from  the  western  sea,  and  at  once  points 
out  the  practicability  of  improving  it  into  a  safe  and  spacious  haven.  The  want  of  means 
was  simply  the  want  of  money. 

We  departed  from  this  humble  port  in  our  Portreath  boat,  with  which  and  with  its. 
crew  we  were  now  on  so  familiar  a  footing,  that  we  began  to  feel  for  both  a  great  degree 
of  partiality.  Our  acquaintance  had  been  only  of  three  days'  duration,  but  we  computed 
it,  not  by  the  number  of  hours,  but  of  waves,  that  we  had  passed  over  together,  and  it  had 
been  watered  into  a  growth  that,  outran  time.  The  coast  at  Newquay,  and  to  the  north- 
ward of  it,  still  preserves  its  wildness  and  grandeur,  and  is  still  defended  by  a  chain  of 
adamant.  We  passed  some  leagues  that  were  not  diversified  by  any  creeks  or  inlets  at 
which  we  could  land  to  look  at  a  boat,  or  gossip  with  the  owner  of  it :  what  luck 
with  the  fish  ?  the  first  question  on  our  part ;  and  on  his,  what  news  from  the  French  ? 

In  travelling  in  a  chaise  through  a  country  which  was  new  to  them,  many  may  remember, 

that 


26  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

that  they  liave  often  let  down  the  window,  and  torn  their  throats  to  rags  in  roaring  to  the 
driver,  "  Who  is  the  owner  of  this  house,  and  that  house  ?"  and  having  been  assured  that 
it  was  Mr.  Jenkins,  or  some  other,  equally  a  stranger,  have  received  the  bald  name  with 
an  air  of  contentment,  as  if  something  had  actually  been  gained.  With  the  same  thirst  for 
knowledge,  we  seldom  approached  a  rock  without  studiously  enquiring  what  it  was  called, 
as  if  the  title  of  the  Gull,  or  the  Goose,  could  make  it  more  or  less  than  a  rock.  On  the 
coast  every  rock,  at  all  peculiar  in  form  or  colour,  has  a  name,  by  which  it  is  identified 
as  a  seamark  :  to  seamen  these  minute  distinctions  are  of  substantial  use;  to  us  they  were 
mere  shadows.  Pencarn  Point  and  Trevose  Head,  two  frowning  capes,  which  we  had  seen 
when  some  leagues  ahead  of  us,  had  demanded  our  earliest  attention  and  enquiries. 
Headlands  are  very  important  signs  to  all  who  travel  by  sea :  they  give  to  the  distant  ship 
the  first  promise  of  her  approach  towards  land,  and  are  conspicuous  guides  for  the  coasting 
voyager.  Trevose  Head  was  not  without  interest  to  us;  and  though  only  eight  hours  had 
elapsed  since  we  departed  from  breakfast  and  our  native  land,  yet  we  doubled  it  with  a 
throb  of  gratitude,  for  we  were  then  conscious  that  we  were  advancing  fast  towards  the 
dinner  and  the  port  to  which  we  were  bound.  Opposite  to  the  Head  are  two  rocks  rising 
from  the  sea,  called  the  Cow  and  Calf,  which  I  pause  to  record,  merely  for  the  sake  of  ex- 
plaining that  they  owe  their  title,  not  to  any  resemblance  that  they  have,  or  are  supposed 
to  have,  to  a  cow  and  calf  of  any  breed  or  country,  but  to  the  obvious  fact  of  one  being 
large  and  the  other  larger.  From  Trevose  three  miles  brought  us  to  the  entrance  of 
Padstow  Haven,  or  the  Camel  river,  which  forms  the  haven.  There  is  a  bar  of  sand 
running  across  the  mouth,  on  which  the  sea  was  breaking  with  great  violence :  we  passed 
over  it,  not  without  risk,  but  without  accident;  and  after  sailing  for  two  miles  up  the 
haven,  with  banks  of  sand  on  each  side  of  us,  and  plains  and  hills  of  sand  beyond,  landed 
at  Padstow. 

This  is  the  largest  town  on  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall,  and  we  had  long  looked  for- 
ward to  it  as  a  place  which  was  to  furnish  a  considerable  quota  of  interesting  matter:  here 
we  were  to  repair  the  dilapidations  that  were  visible  in  every  article  of  our  external  con- 
dition ;  here  was  the  land  of  promise,  where  we  were  again  to  indulge  in  the  long  suspended 
gratifications  of  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping,  a  little  distinguished  from  pigs.  Our 
expectations  had  been  encouraged  by  the  large  characters  in  which  Padstow  was  signalized 
in  our  chart,  and  by  the  reports  of  people  of  less  favoured  parts :  "  We  have  not  a  sheet 
of  writing  paper  left,  sir;  we  have  thread,  but  are  quite  out  of  needles;  there  is  not  a 
button  in  the  house,  and  we  have  nothing  but  barley  bread  ;  but  you  are  not  many  leagues 
from  Padstow,  and  there  you  will  be  provided  with  every  thing  you  want."  All  our  hopes, 
nevertheless,  ended  in  disappointment.  We  were  conducted  to  an  inn,  of  greater  extent, 
indeed,  than  any  which  we  had  lately  been  accustomed  to,  but  where  increase  of  space  an- 
swered no  other  purpose  than  that  of  making  room  for  more  dirt,  and  where,  instead  of 
Molly,  a  male  waiter  informed  us,  that  for  our  dinner  there  was  no  cold  meat,  and  none 

that 


VOYAGE  ROUND  CHEAT  BRITAIN.  27 

that  could  be  made  hot ;  and  for  our  night  accommodation,  a  room  capable  of  holding 
two  beds,  but  furnished  with  only  one. 

The  town  is  built  on  the  western  bank  of  the  river  Camel,  and  has  three  alleys  more 
than  any  other  town  on  this  coast.  I  observed  no  other  superiority,  unless  I  mention  that 
all  the  houses  are  covered  with  a  fine  blue  slate,  which  gives,  at  least  to  their  roofs,  an  air 
of  neatness  and  uniformity.  The  Camel  or  Alan  river,  so  called  from  the  Cornish  term 
Cabm-alan,  expressive  of  the  crookedness  of  its  course,  is  one  of  the  principal  rivers  in 
Cornwall.  It  rises  about  two  miles  north  of  Camelford,  and  from  thence  flows  to  the 
southward  in  a  very  circuitous  channel  to  Bodmin,  from  whence  it  inclines  again  to  the 
northward,  and  becomes  navigable  for  barges  at  Egloshel ;  its  stream  is  afterwards  in- 
creased by  several  smaller  rivers,  and  at  Padstow  is  more  than  half  a  mile  wide :  two  miles 
below  this  town  it  opens  into  the  Bristol  Channel.  Padstow  Harbour,  though  the  best  on 
this  coast,  has,  like  the  rest,  suffered  materially  from  a  vast  accumulation  of  sand,  thrown 
into  it  from  the  Bristol  Channel,  an  evil  which  is  continually  increasing,  and  for  which 
there  is  no  remedy.  The  bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  is  so  elevated,  that  though  there  is 
water  enough  on  each  side  of  it  for  ships  of  three  or  four  hundred  tons,  yet  no  vessel  of 
more  than  two  hundred  tons  can  pass  over  it ;  and  if  there  be  any  swell  of  the  sea,  so 
heavy  a  surf  falls  on  this  bar,  that  small  vessels  dare  not  approach  it,  except  at  high  spring 
tides,  and  in  very  fine  weather.  A  captain  of  a  vessel  informed  me,  that  the  harbour  is  so 
entirely  sheltered  from  every  wind,  that  when  once  fairly  in,  he  had  no  care  on  his  mind 
but  that  of  getting  fairly  out. 

The  sand  has  not  only  spread  itself  over  the  bed  and  banks  of  the  river,  but  has  been 
carried  by  the  winds  over  the  surrounding  country,  destroying  all  vegetation,  and  con- 
founding its  beautiful  forms  and  cheerful  colours  in  one  brown,  barren  waste.  I  must  ex- 
cept from  this  general  view  a  few  elevated  spots  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  are  above  the 
reach  of  the  sand,  and  which  some  gentlemen  have  been  endeavouring  for  many  years  to 
decorate  with  trees ;  proving,  by  experiment  on  experiment,  that  while  the  height  of  the 
hills  secures  them  from  the  invasion  of  the  sand,  it  also  exposes  them  to  the  sea-wind,  an 
irreconcileable  enemy  to  all  plantations.  The  proprietor  of  the  only  good  house  about 
Padstow  pointed  out  to  us,  with  a  satisfaction  at  once  too  lively  and  harmless  to  challenge 
any  thing  on  our  part  but  assent,  some  picturesque  improvements  which  he  had  effected 
in  his  grounds  in  spite  of  nature,  who  had  opposed  him  throughout  with  peculiar  malignity. 
On  one  little  mount  was  a  grove  of  all  kinds  of  trees,  in  all  stages  of  decay,  of  which,  in 
five  minutes,  you  could  have  counted  not  only  the  branches,  but  the  leaves ;  and  on  another 
eminence  a  few  palisaded  sticks,  which  it  was  hoped  would,  in  a  course  of  years,  sprout 
up  into  another  grove  "  to  correspond,"  both  combining  to  make  at  least  one  estate  near 
Padstow  conspicuous  for  something  more  than  nakedness  and  dearth. 

On  referring  to  its  ancient  history,  I  find  that  Padstow  was  the  place  where  the  first 
religious  house  in  Cornwall  was  founded,  in  the  year  432,  by  St.  Patrick,  who  taught  his 

E  disciples 


28  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

disciples  there  for  thirty  }rears,  and  died  and  was  buried  there.  His  holy  bones  were  after- 
wards removed  to  Bodmin,  where  they  rested  in  peace  for  many  years,  till  one  Martin,  a 
pious  thief  and  a  regular  canon,  stole  and  transported  them  to  Brittany  in  France.  The 
theft  was  soon  discovered,  and  Roger,  the  prior  of  the  church  of  Bodmin,  and  all  the  honest 
part  of  the  chapter,  insisted  upon  restitution  with  such  vehemence,  that  they  speedily  re- 
covered their  prize.  The  body  was,  in  process  of  time,  distributed  in  fragments  to  various 
religious  houses,  and  king  Athelstan,  who  was  a  great  collector  of  relics,  is  reported  to  have 
endowed  the  monastery  of  St.  Peter's,  at  Exeter,  with  a  lock  of  the  hair,  and  the  whole  of 
a  great  toe.  The  mode  of  navigation  adopted  by  St.  Patrick  in  his  passage  from  Ireland 
is  singular :  his  legend  declares  that  he  swam  over  on  his  altar.  St.  Piran,  another  holy 
man  who  came  from  Ireland  to  Cornwall,  fled  from  his  enemies  at  a  moment's  notice,  and 
bounded  over  the  channel  on  a  millstone.  This  St.  Piran  was  a  sad  toper,  and  on  one 
occasion  got  so  unmanageably  drunk  that  he  fell  into  a  well,  foundered,  and  was  drowned — 
certainly  a  most  inglorious  and  inconsistent  death  for  a  man  who  had  once  floated  like  a 
feather  on  the  waves,  though  seated  on  a  millstone.  It  is  recorded  of  him,  that  he  was  a 
most  excellent  saint  when  sober.  The  lower  orders  of  people  in  Cornwall  are  to  this  day 
notorious  for  drunkenness*,  and  may,  perhaps,  have  derived  their  predilection  for  dram- 
drinking  from  this  jolly  saint,  Piran.  In  the  parish  of  Little  Piran,  near  St.  Agnes,  they 
now  say  of  a  man  who  is  exceedingly  drunk,  that  he  is  Piran. 

At  Padstow  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  discharging  our  Portreath  boat,  for  the 
crew  declared  that  they  had  already  been  carried  out  of  their  usual  soundings,  and  could 
not  rely  upon  their  pilotage  any  farther  to  the  northward.  We  therefore  hired  horses,  and 
again  sallied  forth  on  our  rambles.  The  coast,  for  some  miles  to  the  northward  of  Padstow, 
is  remarkable  only  for  a  line  of  sand  banks ;  the  cliffs  are  low,  and  though  rugged,  not 
thrown  into  any  variety  of  striking  forms.  We  encountered  nothing  worthy  of  observation 
till  we  arrived  at  Port  Isaac,  a  little  creek,  where  vessels  of  small  burden  occasionally 
land,  and  are  loaded  with  slate  procured  from  a  quarry  in  the  neighbourhood.  We  saw 
a  small  sloop  on  the  sand  receiving  her  freight :  the  people  employed  to  load  her  were 
principally  women,  two  or  three  of  whom  stood  in  a  cart,  and  as  many  on  the  vessel's 
deck,  tossing  the  slates  from  one  to  another,  with  an  energy  that  quite  shamed  their  petti- 
coats. Their  labour  is  immoderately  hard,  they  can  accomplish  as  much  in  a  given  time 
as  men  can  do,  and  yet  they  receive  considerably  less  wages,  because  they  are  women. 
On  all  occasions  the  same  injurious  system  of  detraction  is  extended  towards  women,  and 
whether  it  be  as  poets  and  philosophers,  or  servants  of  all  work,  they  are  equally  obliged, 
in  their  claims  to  public  estimation  and  reward,  to  submit  to  the  deduction  of  a  per  centage 
on  their  sex. 

On  entering  the  village  of  Port  Isaac  we  were  assailed  by  a  stench,  which  would  be 
wronged  by  any  attempt  on  my  part  to  describe  it  There  was  no  appearance  of  con- 

*  See  Pohvhcle's  "  History  of  Cornwall,  in  respect  to  the  Health,  &c.  of  its  Inhabitants,"  p.  107. 

sciousness 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  29 

sciousness  in  the  countenances  of  the  inhabitants ;  and  we  found,  on  investigation,  that 
there  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  wind,  but  simply  a  separate  dunghill  before  each  door  of 
the  village,  composed  chiefly  of  the  most  loathsome  remains  of  the  fish  caught  during  the 
last  six  months,  besides  an  immense  accumulation  of  the  same  abominable  matter  on  the 
beach,  in  all  degrees  of  corruption.  The  pigs  were  engaged  in  fruitless  efforts  to  remove 
the  nuisance ;  they  fattened  and  became  excellent  pork,  but  there  their  services  ended. 
The  stoicism  of  the  people  we  could  neither  comprehend  nor  imitate ;  what  further  they 
had  amongst  them  that  could  justify  notice,  we  did  not  stop  to  enquire,  for  our  first  im- 
pression was  so  strongly  to  their  disadvantage,  that  we  hurried  from  them  as  fast  as  we 
could,  in  a  transport  of  disgust. 

After  leaving  Port  Isaac  our  road  soon  began  to  improve  in  ruggedness,  and  when 
we  had  ascended  several  prodigious  hills  we  saw  before  us  a  long  extent  of  coast  of  a  very 
sublime  character.  The  cliffs  are  of  immense  height,  and  on  advancing  to  the  edge  we 
beheld  a  precipice  below  us,  and  the  sea  immediately  under  our  feet.  Though  there  was 
a  fresh  breeze  blowing  ou  to  the  land,  we  could  but  just  perceive  that  there  was  motion  on 
the  general  surface  of  the  water ;  we  could  trace  the  foam  of  the  waves  as  they  burst  on  the 
rocks,  but  their  roar  reached  our  ears  in  one  gentle  and  equal  murmur.  As  we  proceeded, 
the  coast  became  still  more  commanding ;  magnitude  was  the  chief  feature,  though  the 
outline,  with  all  its  vastness,  was  even  fantastically  broken,  and  mountains  and  rocks  were 
confounded  together  with  a  wild  variety,  of  which  it  was  impossible  to  note  the  series. 
We  passed  by  no  rock  or  cape  that  had  a  name  till  we  came  to  Tintagell  Head,  a  spot 
more  than  commonly  interesting,  not  only  from  the  grandeur  of  its  local  scenery,  but  its 
connection  with  names  and  events  of  our  remotest  history.  This  promontory  was  once 
entirely  separated  from  the  mainland,  but  is  now  connected  with  it  at  its  base,  by  a  mound 
of  earth  which  has  fallen  from  the  cliffs  above.  We  climbed  up  it  by  the  best,  and  indeed 
the  only  path,  a  most  frightful  ascent  over  steps  of  rock,  projecting,  at  very  irregular  in- 
tervals, from  the  side  of  a  precipice.  On  the  top,  which  includes  an  area  of  about  three 
acres  of  ground,  are  the  ruins  of  a  castle,  once  the  residence  of  the  earliest  kings  and  dukes 
of  Cornwall,  and  illustrious  as  the  birthplace  of  the  far-famed  king  Arthur.  Lord  Bacon 
observes  of  this  prince,  that  there  is  truth  enough  in  his  history  to  make  him  famous,  besides 
that  which  is  fabulous ;  determining,  I  suppose,  that  all  is  true,  except  what  is  outrageously 
impossible.  All  authorities^ decide  that  he  was  born  in  Tintagell  castle,  and  I  see  no  reason 
for  questioning  the  fact,  provided  we  admit  that  he  was  born  at  all.  After  having  accom- 
plished many  deeds  that  were  inconceivably  glorious,  and  have  already  filled  too  many 
volumes  to  require  any  illustration  from  me,  he  received  his  death  blow  in  a  battle  with 
his  rebellious  relation,  Mordred,  near  Camelford,  and  not  many  miles  from  Tintagell. 

"  As  though  no  other  place  on  Britain's  spacious  earth 
Were  worthy  of  his  end  but  where  he  had  his  birth." 

Drayton's  Poly-Olbiou,  Song  1st. 

He 


30  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BUITAItf. 

He  retired  to  Glastonbury,  Somerset,  in  order  to  have  his  wound  cured,  but  not  receiving 
the  relief  which  he  expected,  disappeared,  nobody  knew  exactly  how  nor  when,  and  thus 
fulfilled  the  last  count  in  the  prophecy  of  the  seer  Merlin,  "  Et  exitus  ejus  dubius  erit.v 

The  ruins  which  are  now  visible  at  Tintagell  are  very  inconsiderable,  consisting 
merely  of  some  scattered  fragments  of  a  garreted  wall,  and  some  foundations  of  buildings, 
sufficiently  defaced  to  set  even  conjecture  at  defiance.  On  an  opposite  hill,  where  are 
also  some  ruins  of  a  similar  character,  there  formerly  stood  a  ward  of  the  fortress,  which 
had  a  communication  with  the  'island  by  means  of  a  drawbridge.  The  situation  of  the 
castle  must  have  rendered  it  impregnable,  for  it  was  built  on  an  eminence  more  than  four 
hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  to  be  ascended  by  only  one  track,  too  narrow  to 
admit  two  people  abreast,  and  too  rugged  to  be  passed  without  the  slowest  circumspection. 
The  walls  which  now  remain  are  constructed  with  stone  and  lime,  a  circumstance  that 
weighs  a  little  against  the  probability  of  their  having  formed  part  of  a  castle,  which  was 
standing  in  the  time  of  the  dukes  and  earls  of  Cornwall,  before  the  invasion  by  Caesar,  or 
even  in  the  reign  of  Arthur,  in  the  year  500.  Without  attempting  to  fix  the  precise  year 
when  the  art  of  masonry  was  introduced  into  this  country,  we  may  presume  that  if  the 
Britons,  in  the  age  of  Caesar,  had  had  the  skill  to  build  one  substantial  castle,  they  would 
have  built  more  than  one,  and  that  Britain  would  not  have  fallen  so  easy  a  conquest  to 
the  Romans,  and  at  subsequent  periods  to  the  Saxons,  the  Danes,  and  the  Normans.  In 
contempt,  however,  of  a  few  contradictory  particulars,  I  am  still  willing  to  believe,  with 
Cornish  historians,  that  Arthur  was  lord  of  Tintagell.  The  wildness  of  the  situation  asso- 
ciates admirably  with  the  fanciful  pageantry  of  romance,  and  on  the  battlements  of  the 
fortress,  or  on  the  summit  of  a  rock,  the  giant  form  of  the  chivalrous  Arthur  may  be 
stationed  with  the  happiest  effect. 

Carew  observes,  speaking  of  Tintagell,  "  I  saw  upon  it  a  decayed  chappell,  a  faire 
spring  of  water,  a  cave,  reaching  once  (by  my  guide's  report)  some  far  way  underground, 
and  (which  you  will  perhaps  suspect  of  untruth)  a  hermit's  grave,  hewn  out  in  the  rock, 
and  serving  each  bodies  proportion  for  a  burial."  None  of  these  articles  are  at  present 
visible,  but  they  are  recorded  with  a  kind  of  mysteriousness  that  flatters  the  imagination, 
and  disarms  all  sober  investigation. 

We  found  the  path  by  which  we  had  ascended  considerably  more  alarming  in  our 
descent,  and  were  hurried  down  it  with  a  precipitancy  which,  though  very  offensive  to  our 
feelings,  was  not  to  be  resisted.  Our  survey  of  the  trumpery  ruins  of  the  castle  ill  repaid 
us  for  the  toil  and  danger  to  which  we  had  been  exposed,  and  we  had  the  further  mortifi- 
cation of  not  being  able  to  conceal  from  ourselves,  that  the  finest  view  of  Tintagell  is  from 
its  base.  Vast  masses  of  the  mountain  have  fallen  from  its  sides,  and  the  rocks  now  rise, 
recede,  and  project,  in  a  variety  of  strange  forms,  amongst  which  fancy  may  readily  trace 
the  colossal  battlements  and  columns  of  a  castle,  and  of  such  a  castle  as  Arthur  might 
have  been  proud  to  reign  over,  had  the  space  between  his  eyes  been  two  spans  instead  of 

one. 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  31 

one.  I  should  advise  all  visitors  to  Tintagell  to  content  themselves  with  thus  imagining  a 
castle  for  king  Arthur,  for  I  can  assure  them  that,  though  they  may  sacrifice  their  lives  by 
attempting  to  reach  the  summit  of  the  promontory,  they  can  see  nothing  there  but  the 
rubbish  of  an  old  wall,  out  of  which  imagination  will  be  infinitely  more  puzzled  to  construct 
a  castle  than  out  of  the  rocks  below. 

From  Tintagell  we  found  all  straight  forward  motion  along  the  cliffs  to  be  imprac- 
ticable ;  our  horses  became  worse  than  useless,  for  they  could  neither  carry  nor  follow  us, 
nor  am  I  quite  certain  that  we  should  have  ventured  to  follow  them  had  they  been  able  to 
lead  the  way.  We,  therefore,  turned  from  the  coast  to  the  right,  and  pursued,  for  half  a 
mile,  a  horse  road,  as  it  was  called,  but  not  a  rider's  road,  till  we  came  to  Bossiney, 
a  miserable  village,  where  poverty  and  indolence  were  so  intimately  combined,  that  it  was 
impossible  to  discover  which  was  eldest  born,  whether  poverty  was  the  child  or  the  parent 
of  indolence.  The  thatch  which  covered  the  houses  was  black  and  ragged ;  the  walls  were 
full  of  chasms,  which  admitted  the  light,  excluded  from  the  windows  by  patches  of  blue 
aprons  and  wisps  of  hay  and  straw,  in  the  place  of  glass  ;  there  was  a  dunghill  on  one  side 
of  every  door,  and  a  trough  for  hogs  on  the  other;  but  all  these  were  appearances  of  com- 
fort compared  with  the  furniture  of  the  interior.  Here  it  is  difficult  to  describe  particulars  : 
father,  mother,  and  children,  with  dogs  all  ribs,  and  rhirkens  all  feathers,  besides  a  motley 
assemblage  of  materials  of  which  it  was  impossible  to  define  the  use,  were  all  jumbled 
together,  and  connected  by  one  strong  cement  of  dirt.  I  have  seen  many  villages,  but  no 
one  where  man  was  so  passive  an  animal  as  at  Bossiney.  The  country  around  it  is  quite 
in  character ;  it  has  the  nakedness  without  the  grandeur  of  the  coast,  and  rises  in  tame 
and  regular  hills,  where  fern  and  moss  might  grow,  but  are  not  seen,  and  sinks  into  valleys, 
of  which  nothing  can  be  said  but  that  they  are  lower  than  the  hills.  Scenes  like  these  were 
of  some  service  to  us,  for  we  retired  from  them  to  more  animating  prospects,  with  our  sight 
refreshed  by  repose  and  our  discrimination  quickened  by  contrast. 

We  walked  three  miles  over  another  horse  road  to  Boscastle,  than  which  and  Bossiney 
a  stronger  contrast  cannot  be  conceived.  AVe  at  once  pronounced  it  to  be  the  most  romantic 
spot  that  we  had  hitherto  seen.  I  do  not  speak  of  the  village,  which,  though  infinitely 
superior  in  all  respects  to  Bossiney,  is  merely  a  group  of  ordinary  cottages,  situated  on  the 
declivity  of  a  hill,  while  the  country  in  its  neighbourhood  is  marked  by  the  same  insipidity 
which  generally  characterizes  the  interior  of  Cornwall.  It  is  the  harbour  and  the  scenery 
about  it  which  distinguish  Boscastle,  and  nothing  in  nature  can  be  more  fancifully  dis- 
posed. A  narrow  chasm  between  two  enormous  crags  makes  a  passage  for  the  sea,  which 
enters  in  a  serpentine  course,  and  winds  its  way  up  a  valley  overhung  on  each  side  by 
black  and  jagged  rocks.  We  saw  it  in  a  calm,  when  the  sea  stole  in  and  pursued  its 
sinuous  track  without  noise  or  ferment;  in  gales  of  wind  it  dashes  in  with  prodigious  fury, 
and  bursting  on  the  rocks  at  every  angle,  rushes  up  the  valley  in  a  sheet  of  foam.  A  lino 
of  white  posts  is  ranged  on  each  side  of  the  channel,  as  a  direction  for  vessels  in  the  night; 

a  precarious 


32  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

a  precarious  guide  through  this  maze  of  rocks,  yet  one  that  decides  between  safety  and 
ruin.  I  can  conceive  nothing  more  terrible  than  entering  this  harbour  at  night  in  a  gale, 
with  the  rocks  closing  above  you  and  deepening  the  darkness,  and  with  nothing  visible 
but  the  white  breakers,  roaring  on  all  sides  amongst  rocks  which  you  know  it  would  be 
destruction  to  touch.  The  harbour  at  Portreath  is  very  frightful,  but  the  course  is  straight, 
and  therefore  attention  may  be  confined  to  one  object,  or  as  seamen  say,  to  keeping  a  good 
look  out  ahead.  At  Boscastle  the  crookedness  of  the  channel  is  the  cause  of  many  diffi- 
culties ;  the  most  serious  is  the  contrariety  of  the  wind,  which  may  be  fair  in  one  reach 
and  foul  in  another,  and  thus  occasion,  in  so  narrow  a  passage,  extreme  confusion  in  the 
steerage  of  the  vessel  and  the  management  of  her  sails.  None  but  pilots  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  harbour  venture  to  approach  it,  and  they  are  not  many,  for  the  trade  of 
the  place  is  very  trifling.  There  is  a  stone  pier  attached  to  a  rock  projecting  into  the 
middle  of  the  channel,  which  secures  a  corner  for  vessels,  where  they  ride  secure  from  the 
recoil  of  the  sea  from  the  opposite  rocks.  The  pier  is  a  very  small  one,  but  it  forms  a 
pretty  curved  line,  which  is  very  picturesque  in  itself,  and  harmonizes  with  the  forms  of 
the  objects  about  it.  I  have  divided  this  singular  scene  into  parts  which  I  am  conscious 
that  I  have  but  imperfectly  described  :  I  know  no  form  of  words  that  give  any  representa- 
tion of  the  whole,  as  I  saw  it,  in  one  view.  What  the  eye  comprehends  at  a  glance  would 
fill  a  whole  volume  of  description.  I  have  only  further  to  observe  of  Boscastle,  that  there 
was  anciently  a  castle  near  it,  belonging  to  the  family  of  the  Botereaux,  of  whom  I  could 
learn  nothing  but  that  they  have  been  long  since  extinct  and  forgotten. 

For  two  leagues,  from  Boscastle  to  the  headland  of  Cambeak,  the  coast  extends  in  a 
line  of  lofty  and  precipitous  rocks,  fully  as  grand  as  that  near  Tintagell,  and  so  much  like 
it  as  not  to  require  more  particular  notice.  A  little  to  the  northward  of  Cambeak  it  sud- 
denly changes  its  character,  and  becomes  tame  and  uninteresting :  the  rocks  dwindle  and 
make  way  for  the  sand,  which  fills  up  all  inequalities,  and  at  once  assimilates  all  objects. 
Nature  creates  endless  varieties  of  scenery  with  the  elements  of  wood,  rock,  and  water, 
but  with  sand,  though  she  scatters  it  about  with  amazing  profusion,  she  produces  but  one 
effect,  and  that  a  very  bad  one.  We  galloped  over  this  cheerless  track  with  as  much  ex- 
pedition as  possible,  and  were  only  twice  checked  in  our  speed  by  our  guide,  first,  that 
we  might  observe  a  little  village  on  our  right,  founded  by  the  immortal  St.  Gennis,  and 
farther  on,  a  bay  on  our  left,  called  Widemouth  Bay,  presenting  nothing  to  charm  the  eye, 
but  well  stocked  with  flat  fish.  Without  other  interruption  we  arrived  at  Bude,  still  in  a 
region  of  sand,  but  enlivened  by  men,  women,  and  children. 

This  place  is  called  Bude  Haven,  though  at  present  only  a  sandy  creek,  wh^re  small 
vessels  venture  to  ground,  and  are  so  exposed  to  the  wind  and  sea  that  they  have  a  fair 
chance  of  having  their  bottoms  knocked  out  by  every  returning  tide.  It  was  once  a  large 
and  commodious  port,  all  traces  of  which  are  now  buried  under  the  sand.  The  river  Bude 
meets  the  sea  here,  and  at  its  confluence  formerly  spread  into  a  wide  estuary,  capable  of 

receiving 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  33 

receiving  ships  of  great  burden,  but  now  runs  to  the  sea  in  a  shallow  stream,  navigable 
only  for  ducks  and  geese.  The  destruction  of  the  haven  is  attributed  both  to  the  sand 
from  the  sea  and  the  mud  from  the  river ;  the  first  imbankment  was  of  sand,  which  ob- 
structed the  mud  in  its  passage  to  the  sea,  and  co-operated  with  it  in  filling  up  the  channel 
of  the  haven.  But  though  Bude  has  at  present  no  title  to  the  character  of  a  harbour,  it  is 
still  frequented  as  a  port,  in  consideration  of  what  it  was  formerly,  and  greatly  to  the 
emolument  'of  the  shipwrights.  I  saw  several  vessels  moored  on  the  sand,  and  was  so 
struck  with  their  evident  exposure,  that  1  could  not  forbear  from  expressing  my  opinion 
of  their  danger  to  some  of  the  captains ;  but  they  all  explained  to  me  the  cause  of  their 
situation  by  observing,  and  that  too  in  a  tone  of  justification,  that  Bude  was  once  as  good 
a  harbour  as  any  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall.  I  have  never  seen  the  game  of  follow  my 
leader  more  desperately  pursued. 

The  village  of  Bude  is  very  small,  but  has  some  neat  houses  in  it,  which  are  let  out 
in  lodgings  to  visitors,  who  go  thither  for  the  benefit  of  sea-bathing,  though  the  place  is 
not  supplied  with  any  conveniences  that  can  render  the  act  of  bathing  either  comfortable 
or  decent,  particularly  to  the  ladies.  No  bathing  machines  are  employed,  and  conse- 
quently, the  ladies  are  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  undressing  themselves  in  the  dark  and 
dismal  caverns  hollowed  out  in  the  cliffs  by  the  sea,  and  of  parading  into  the  water  not 
unseen.  At  the  precise  moment  which  they  choose  for  their  dip,  some  male  starers  are 
certain  to  be  picking  up  shells  at  the  water's  edge,  who,  under  this  pretence,  have  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  the  whole  exhibition. 

There  is  no  circulating  library  or  trinket  shop  at  Bude,  where  the  visitors  can  spend 
their  money  and  their  mornings,  so  that,  in  spite  of  the  bracing  effects  of  the  cold  bath,  I 
think  1  discovered  some  symptoms  of  flaccidity  about  them,  and  a  certain  anxiety  in  their 
countenances  which  declared  that  they  were  seeking  more  than  they  could  find.  I  have 
heard  some  seamen  say  that  they  preferred  a  storm  to  a  calm,  and  I  confess  that  beating 
hemp  would  be  more  to  my  taste  than  waiting  three  and  twenty  hours  every  day  for  a 
plunge  in  the  sea. 

Our  journey,  for  some  miles  to  the  northward  of  Bude,  was  over  rocks  and  sand 
blended  together,  the  sand  being  rather  predominant.  As  we  advanced  the  rocks  began 
to  resume  their  ascendancy,  and  when  we  had  reached  Wellcombe,  the  northern  extremity 
of  the  coast  of  Cornwall,  they  were  sufficiently  bold  and  rugged  to  make  our  last  impres- 
sion of  this  coast  like  our  first  at  the  Land's-End.  A  huge  rock,  at  a  little  distance  from 
the  land,  called  the  Gull  Rock,  marks  the  boundary  of  the  Cornish  coast,  and  our  guide 
begged  us  to  observe  that  it  defined  it  with  as  much  precision  as  if  placed  there  on  purpose. 
At  Wellcombe,  on  a  boggy  moor,  the  Tamar  and  the  Torridge,  the  two  principal  rivers  in 
the  west  of  England,  have  their  source.  They  rise  within  a  few  yards  of  each  other, 
though  they  pursue  very  different  courses.  The  Tamar  flows  to  the  southward  with  very 
little  variation  till  it  forms  the  estuary  of  Hamoaze,  one  of  the  divisions  of  Plymouth 

Harbour. 


34  VOYAGE    ROUND    UttJ&A?    BRITAIN. 

Harbour.  The  Torridge  runs  in  a  circle,  and  falls  into  the  Bristol  Channel  at  Bideford  Bay, 
directly  opposite  to  the  point  where  the  Taniar  meets  the  British  Channel,  and  distant 
from  it  about  sixty  miles.  Both  these  rivers  are  regarded  as  Devonshire  rivers,  though 
they  both  rise  in  Cornwall.  As  the  Torridge  strikes  from  its  spring  immediately  into 
Devonshire,  and  never  returns,  in  any  of  its  windings,  to  the  land  of  its  birth,  it  may, 
perhaps,  be  justly  claimed  ;  but  the  Tamar  divides  the  two  counties,  and  from  its  spring 
to  the  sea  runs  between  them,  so  that  nothing  remains  to  mark  a  preference  but  its  origin, 
and  that  rests  with  Cornwall. 

The  distance  from  the  Land's-End  to  Wellcombe  is  computed  to  be  nearly  a  hundred 
miles,  but,  by  following  every  inflection  of  the  coast,  we  had  added  to  that  distance 
very  considerably.  We  had  not  advanced  far  into  Devonshire  before  we  perceived  over 
land,  in  the  distance  before  us,  a  great  improvement  in  the  face  of  the  country,  particu- 
larly distinguished  by  an  abundance  of  trees.  It  is  not  very  readily  to  be  accounted  for, 
why  so  near  the  confines  of  both  counties  trees  should  grow  in  Devonshire  and  not  in 
Cornwall.  The  wind  from  the  western  ocean  is  visibly  the  cause  of  the  general  nakedness 
of  Cornwall,  but  that  this  evil  cannot  have  the  same  influence  at  its  eastern  extremity,  is 
proved  by  trees  on  the  frontier  of  the  adjoining  county.  The  indolence  or  unskilfulness 
of  planters  may  have  some  effect,  and  indeed  I  was  informed  by  an  agriculturist  (a  Devon- 
shire one,  I  acknowledge)  that  in  the  case  in  question,  the  sea  and  the  soil  were  not  the 
parties  in  fault.  We  observed  no  immediate  distinction  between  the  two  counties  on  the 
coast,  which  from  Wellcombe  to  Hertland  Quay  still  trends  to  the  northward,  rising  in  a 
succession  of  bold  and  lofty  peaks.  Some  frightful  rocks  extend  along  shore,  at  some 
distance  from  the  land  and  considerably  above  water,  which  are  regarded  with  great  horror 
by  seamen,  for  if  a  vessel  is  wrecked  upon  them  there  is  no  chance  of  preservation  for  any 
one  of  the  crew. 

Near  Hertland  Quay  the  strata  of  the  rocks  on  the  cliffs,  and  those  which  jut  out  into 
the  sea,  have  been  strangely  rent  and  disordered,  and  bear  about  them  traces  of  some  great 
convulsion.  In  some  places  they  are  forced  out  of  their  horizontal  position  into  a  gentle 
undulation,  and  in  others  are  parted  by  a  more  violent  disruption,  and  stand  up  vertically. 
They  lie  in  all  possible  directions:  some  strata  abut  full  into  the  middle  of  another  layer ; 
some  incline  towards  each  other,  tending  to  the  centre,  in  the  shape  of  a  wedge ;  some  run 
in  a  straight  line ;  others  form  a  curve.  All  these  varieties,  the  horizontal,  the  vertical, 
and  every  degree  of  inclination  between,  occur  in  a  small  space,  and  are  all  confusedly 
jumbled  together.  I  do  not  know  that  it  has  been  ascertained  how  far  this  dislocation 
and  irregular  intermixture  of  the  strata  extend  inland  ;  similar  appearances  have  been  ob- 
served in  the  southern  parts  of  Devonshire,  particularly  on  the  borders  of  the  river  Exe, 
between  Exeter  and  Exminster,  and  in  the  country  round  Plymouth. 

Hertland  Quay  was  the  first  village  that  we  encountered  on  Devonshire  ground,  and 
consists  of  a  cluster  of  mean  cottages,  which  have  no  evident  comfort  about  them  but  that 

of 


Hartland  pier  North  Devon 


Clovelly  on  the  Coast  of  North  Devon 


VOVAGE    UOUND    GRKAT    liUITAIN.  35 

of  being  protected  by  a  high  mountain  from  the  east  wind,  and  the  value  of  this  immunity 
is  counterbalanced  by  their  full  exposure  to  the  west,  which  blows  from  the  sea,  and  has 
left  marks  of  its  fury  on  the  roof  of  every  cottage.  The  situation  of  the  village  is  more 
than  commonly  rude  and  romantic :  to  the  right  and  left  extends  the  coast  in  a  line  of 
towering  cliffs  of  black  rock ;  in  front  is  a  little  harbour,  marked  out  and  secured  by  a 
semicircular  pier,  which  might  have  formed  one  gentle  feature  in  the  scene  had  it  not  been 
for  a  reef  of  rocks  beyond  it,  running  far  into  the  sea  and  rising  in  vast  fragments,  which 
presents  no  images  but  those  of  danger  and  destruction ;  behind,  the  prospect  is  at  once 
bounded  by  a  rugged  mountain  which  overhangs  the  village,  and  thus  completes  its 
inclosure.  The  cottages  are  so  uncouth  and  weatherbeaten  that  all  their  artificial 
appearances  are  nearly  worn  out,  and  they  mingle  with  the  rocks  with  so  trifling  an 
indication  of  contrast  that  one  might  imagine  they  were  a  part  of  the  natural  foundations 
of  the  place.  They  seem  too  to  have  undergone  as  many  changes  since  their  first  formation 
as  the  strata  of  the  rocks,  and  exhibit  as  much  inversion  of  common  order,  and  rise  and 
dip  in  as  many  conflicting  slopes  and  unaccountable  obliquities. 

This  was  the  first  place  at  which  we  had  paused,  during  the  course  of  our  voyage,, 
where  there  was  no  provision  for  strangers :  we  had  surprised  many  hotels  that  were  in  a 
state  of  very  doubtful  extremity,  but  here  was  one  still  holding  out  a  promise  of  enter- 
tainment, but  in  all  its  parts  absolutely  defunct.  There  was,  however,  a  great  spirit  of 
hospitality  in  the  landlord,  mixed  with  some  self-reproach  for  his  improvidence,  which 
sufficed  to  appease  us ;  for,  as  Dr.  Johnson  observes,  where  there  is  yet  shame,  there  may 
in  time  be  virtue. 

Four  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Hertland  Quay  is  the  Island  of  Lundy,  a  conspicuous 
object  in  the  Bristol  Channel,  which  is  distinctly  visible  from  every  part  of  the  north  coast 
of  Devonshire,  and  the  opposite  coast  of  South  Wales.  It  is  three  leagues  and  a  half  from 
the  nearest  promontory  on  the  English  coast,  Hertland  Point,  and  about  six  leagues  from 
the  AVelsh  coast.  There  is  a  character  of  great  wildness  and  desolateness  about  islands, 
whose  utmost  limits  may  at  once  be  comprehended  by  the  eye,  which  may  be  seen,  in  one 
view,  bounded  on  all  sides  by  the  sea.  The  land  is  at  all  points  so  blended  with  the  water, 
so  unsheltered  and  unsupported,  that  it  appears  scarcely  to  possess  the  ordinary  security 
of  habitable  ground.  The  best  view  of  Lundy  Island  is  from  a  distance,  when  it  is  seen 
rising  like  a  solitary  mountain  from  the  midst  of  the  waves,  like  a  spot  disinherited  of  the 
common  favours  of  the  earth,  banished  from  its  rightful  place  in  the  creation,  and  cast  out 
into  the  waste  of  a  foreign  and  discordant  element.  There  is  not  a  tree  nor  a  shrub  upon 
it,  nor  would  one  wish  to  see  any  there ;  its  nakedness  accords  with  its  situation,  and  one 
regards  it  only  as  a  mark  for  every  storm  that  blows ;  a  strange  excrescence  of  nature, 
with  the  form  and  substance  of  land,  but  as  desert  and  inhospitable  as  the  sea  which 
surrounds  it.  We  sailed  to  it,  and  found  every  indication  of  barrenness  that  we  had 
observed  from  a  distance  fully  confirmed  on  a  nearer  approach,  though  it  lost  much  of  its 

P  dreary 


3(>  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

dreary  grandeur  when  no  longer  an  island  to  the  eye — when  land  formed  the  line  of  the 
horizon,  and  concealed  from  us  the  expanse  of  sea  beyond. 

There  is  but  one  landing-place,  and  that  is  on  the  east  side  of  the  south  end,  where 
there  is  a  good  beach,  leading  to  a  pathway  cut  in  the  rocks  of  the  cliff.  This  little  cove 
is  sheltered  by  a  detached  mass  of  rock,  called  Rat  Island,  from  the  east,  but  is  open  to 
the  north  wind,  which  was  unluckily  blowing  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  and  had  raised  a  surf 
on  the  beach  that  prevented  our  landing.  Round  every  other  part  the  island  is  guarded 
by  perpendicular  cliffs,  in  some  places  more  than  six  hundred  feet  in  height,  so  that  if  it 
could  ever  become  of  importance  as  a  military  post,  it  would  require  no  ramparts  but  its 
rocks,  and  no  centinel  but  the  north  wind.  Its  length,  from  north  to  south,  is  three  miles, 
and  its  breadth  nowhere  quite  a  mile.  It  contains  two  thousand  acres  of  ground,  four 
hundred  of  which  have  been  tortured  into  a  state  of  meagre  cultivation.  There  is  no 
depth  of  soil  sufficient  for  any  kind  of  vegetation  except  at  the  south  end :  the  middle 
division  and  the  north  end  are  little  better  than  a  waste  of  sand  and  rocks.  Some  attempts 
were  made  a  few  years  ago  to  raise  trees  on  Lundy,  but  the  salt-wind  resisted  any  such 
innovation,  and  if  it  allowed  them  to  take  root,  effectually  provided  against  their  appearance 
above  ground.  The  island  is  inhabited  by  a  few  families,  comprising  about  thirty  people, 
who  have  an  opportunity  of  passing  their  livis  v/ith  truly  primitive  simplicity.  The  summer 
recreation  of  this  little  society  chiefly  consists  in  plucking  gulls  and  skinning  rabbits ;  and 
for  their  winter  hours,  I  am,  perhaps,  as  much  puzzled  to  mark  out  an  employment  as  they 
are  themselves.  The  air  which  they  breathe  is  healthy,  so  that  if  they  do  not  live  merrily 
they  live  long.  The  biography  of  one  John  Sharp,  a  Lundy  man,  is  thus  succinctly  made 
out — he  died  at  the  advanced  age  of  ninety-six.  Rabbits  swarm  in  every  part  of  the  island, 
and  in  summer  the  gulls  assemble  upon  it  in  such  prodigious  flocks,  that  the  spoil  of  their 
feathers,  in  conjunction  with  the  furs  of  the  rabbits,  forms  a  very  considerable  revenue. 
The  rabbits  are  not  valued  for  their  flesh,  which  is  not  good,  and  judging  from  the  surface 
of  the  soil,  under  which  they  burrow,  one  would  imagine  that  there  must  be  very  little  of 
it.  Rats  complete  the  catalogue  of  wild  animals,  and  are  the  only  troublesome  guests  on 
the  island,  not  only  not  contributing  their  common  share  to  the  improvement  of  its 
resources,  but  actually  assuming  a  hostile  character,  and  employing  their  forces  against 
the  rabbits.  There  is  no  possibility  of  expelling  these  marauders,  who  have  already  very 
evidently  thinned  the  ranks  of  the  rabbits,  and  Avill,  it  is  feared,  ultimately  succeed  in 
establishing  themselves  sole  lords  of  the  burrows. 

Our  old  topographical  writers  scarcely  mention  Lundy,  and  the  few  notices  which 
they  give  do  not  represent  it  as  having  ever  been  in  a  much  more  flourishing  condition 
than  at  present.  The  most  memorable  circumstance  in  its  history  occurred  in  the  reign 
of  William  the  Third,  when  it  was  surprised  by  the  French,  who  appeared  before  it  in  a 
ship  of  war,  pretending  to  be  Dutch,  and  having  cajoled  the  natives  with  some  specious 
story,  landed  without  opposition,  and  proceeded  to  commit  the  most  abominable  excesses 

of 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  37 

of  wanton  barbarity.  They  destroyed  all  the  horses,  cows,  and  sheep  that  they  could  find, 
and  threw  them  over  the  cliffs,  ransacked  every  house,  stripped  the  inhabitants  naked,  and 
finally  departed  with  no  valuable  booty,  but  with  the  satisfaction  of  having  involved  a  few 
inoffensive  people  in  misery  and  want. 

The  antiquities  to  be  seen  on  Lundy  are  a  castle,  and  the  last  dust  of  a  small  chapel, 
dedicated  to  St.  Helen.  It  is  not  known  when  or  by  whom  the  castle  was  built,  nor  has 
history  or  tradition  preserved  any  memorials  of  it  that  can  interest  curiosity  about  its 
foundation.  Matthew  Paris,  in  his  history  of  Henry  the  Third,  relates  that  one  William 
de  Marisco,  who  had  conspired  to  assassinate  the  king,  on  the  failure  of  his  attempt,  fled 
to  Lundy  Island,  and  became  a  pirate ;  but  after  committing  desperate  ravages,  particu- 
larly on  the  beef  and  biscuits  of  his  majesty's  subjects,  was  apprehended  and  executed. 
This  renegado,  on  his  trial,  protested  that  he  had  never  plotted  against  the  life  of  the  king, 
that  he  had  fled  to  Lundy  merely  to  avoid  the  ignominy  which  attached  to  him  on  an 
unjust  suspicion,  and  had  turned  pirate  only  for  the  purpose  of  filling  his  belly.  The  castle 
is  now  called  Marisco's  Castle. 

The  last  view  that  I  shall  present  of  Lundy  is  a  poetical  one.  Drayton,  in  his  Poly- 
Olbion,  reproaches  it  with  the  following  sinful  and  shameless  character. 

"  This  Lundy  is  a  nymph  to  idle  toys  inclin'd ; 

And,  all  on  pleasure  set,  doth  wholly  give  her  mind 

To  see  upon  her  shores  her  fowl  and  conies  fed, 

And  wantonly  to  hatch  the  birds  of  Ganymede. 

Of  traffic  or  return  she  never  taketh  care ; 

Not  provident  of  pelf  as  other  islands  are. 

A  lusty,  black-brow'd  girl,  with  forehead  broad  and  high, 

That  often  hath  bewitch'd  the  sea-gods  with  her  eye." 

A  less  rigid  moralist  might  have  connived  at  these  excesses  of  a  thoughtless  island,  who 
really  does  not  appear  to  have  many  other  modes  of  passing  her  time.  At  the  present 
day  she  is  making  some  atonement  for  her  former  transgressions,  by  annual  offerings  of 
the  skins  and  feathers  of  her  favourites.  Her  little  attentions  to  the  sea-gods  are  very 
excusable ;  for  how  can  she  resist  the  temptation  of  perpetual  opportunity  ?  She  has  a 
heart,  not  of  granite,  but  of  soft  slate  and  sandstone. 

On  our  return  to  Hertland  Quay  and  to  our  inn,  our  host  received  us  with  a  quartern 
loaf  in  his  hand  and  a  countenance  full  of  his  larder.  This  was  a  comfortable  surprise, 
and  the  more  so,  as  our  next  stage,  a  very  laborious  one,  was  to  be  performed  on  foot. 
The  man  had  hay  in  his  stables,  but  no  horses.  In  these  rude  parts  of  the  coast  many 
privations  must  be  patiently  submitted  to  ;  where  travellers  are  not  expected  they  are  not 
provided  for.  To  do  justice,  however,  at  once  to  the  courtesy  and  thrift  of  the  coast,  I 
must  observe,  that  where  there  was  but  little  we  always  found  it  very  cheerfully  supplied, 
and  amply  charged  for.  In  the  most  secret  recesses,  where  life  has  not  advanced  beyond 

bread 


38  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

bread  and  bacon,  the  innkeeper's  code  of  charges  is  almost  as  unrelenting  as  in  the 
metropolis.  On  objecting  at  Newquay  to  a  violent  disproportion  between  our  bill  and 
our  fare,  we  were  assured,  that  we  could  not  have  supped  for  one  penny  less  at  the  best 
hotel  in  Plymouth.  What  could  be  replied  to  so  unbiassed  an  explanation  ? 

On  recommencing  our  journey,  our  road  along  the  edge  of  the  cliffs  was  indented  like 
a  saw,  with  the  points  ranged,  sometimes  vertically  and  sometimes  horizontally,  obliging 
us  to  walk  two  miles  of  space  for  one  of  progress,  without  calculating  the  nature  of  the 
ground,  and  particularly  the  ascending  part  of  the  vertical  points.    We  had  been  deterred 
from  proceeding  in  a  boat  by  a  foul  wind,  not  exactly  foreseeing  that  we  should  be 
exposed  to  the  tediousness  of  "  turning  to  windward"  on  shore.     Our  next  halt  was  at 
Hertland  Point,  a  very  striking  promontory,  which  juts  out  like  a  sharp  wedge,  full  six 
hundred  feet  into  the  sea.     It  is  more  than  five  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  where  it  faces 
the  sea  a  complete  precipice.  This  crag  is  of  so  peculiar  a  form,  and  visible  from  so  great  a 
distance,  that  it  stands  a  kind  of  central  sea-mark  in  the  Bristol  Channel ;  a  great  leading 
guide,  which  is  always  familiar  to  the  pilot,  however  he  may  confound  all  minor  distinc- 
tions.    Our  guide  informed  us,  that  people  travelled  many  miles  on  purpose  to  look  at 
this  singular  cape,  and  that  it  was  an  invariable  custom  with  them  to  proceed  to  its 
extreme  point.     We  could  see  every  thing  that  was  to  be  seen  about  it  very  well,  without 
attending  to  this  ceremonial;  but  we  felt  ourselves  challenged  to  prove  our  courage  equal 
to  the  common  standard,  and  therefore  complied  with  it.     The  cape  rises  gradually  as  it 
advances  from  the  land,  and  the  only  pass  that  can  put  courage  to  the  test  is  within  a  few 
yards  of  the  extremity  of  the  point,  where  a  portion  of  rock  has  fallen  away  and  left  a 
shallow  chasm :  into  this  we  descended  by  two  or  three  terrifying  steps — tottered  along  a 
path  not  more  than  a  yard  wide,  with  a  precipice  on  each  side  of  us — ascended  again — 
and  all  in  safety,  but  not  without  a  cold  thrilling  qualm  running  from  the  heart  to  the 
ancles,  and  a  severe  question  from  our  better  judgment,  as  to  the  prudence  of  clambering 
up  frightful  crags,  with  the  certainty  of  gaining  nothing  but  the  top. 

Hertland  Point  is  distinguished  by  a  classical  title,  being  recorded  by  Ptolemy  as 
Herculis  Promontorium,  the  Promontory  of  Hercules,  and  so  called  by  the  Greeks  in  their 
voyages  to  Britain  for  tin.  Hert-land  is  supposed  to  be  a  modification  of  its  original 
appellation.  Though  the  Greeks  were  not  the  first  voyagers  to  this  country,  yet  they  were 
the  first  who  marked  their  progress  along  our  shores  by  ascribing  significant  names  to  our 
headlands  and  promontories ;  the  first  who,  in  the  true  spirit  of  a  lettered  people,  extended 
their  navigation  on  our  coast,  not  merely  with  views  of  profit,  but  with  the  ambition  of 
exhibiting  themselves  to  posterity  in  the  earliest  traces  of  a  newly-discovered  country. 
The  Phenicians,  who  preceded  them,  were  satisfied  with  working  our  mines  and  carrying 
away  our  treasures,  and  did  not  feel  their  national  vanity  interested  in  coining  names  for 
our  rocks  ;  or  if  they  did,  they  had  not  the  power  of  perpetuating  the  fact  in  their  writings, 
for  no  names  of  Phenician  derivation,  applicable  to  any  part  of  our  island,  have  come  down 

to 


VOTAGK    ROUND    GRKAT    BRITAIN.  39 

to  us.  The  earliest  notices  of  Great  Britain  in  the  most  ancient  historians  relate  to  the 
Scilly  Isles,  which  are  invariably  described  by  the  appellation  of  the  Cassiterides ;  they 
were  known  by  that  title  to  Herodotus  four  centuries  and  a  half  before  the  Christian  era. 

Marking  the  progress  of  the  Greeks  along  our  shores  by  the  names  given  by  them 
to  our  capes,  and  delivered  down  to  us  by  Ptolemy,  we  may  suppose  that  from  the 
Cassiterides  they  advanced  towards  the  mainland,  and  sailed  up  the  British  Channel  along 
the  southern  coasts  of  Cornwall  and  Devonshire  as  far  as  the  Start  Point,  which  they  dig- 
nified with  the  imposing  title  of  Helenum  Promontorium,  the  Grecian  Cape.  There  is  no 
promontory  to  the  eastward  of  this  point  that  is  honoured  by  a  Grecian  name.  In  an 
opposite  direction  we  may  trace  their  course  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  north  coast  of 
Cornwall  as  far  as  Hertland  Point,  the  Promontory  of  Hercules,  which  was  the  boundary 
of  their  navigation  to  the  north.  It  is  curious  and  amusing  to  figure  to  ourselves  these 
ancient  voyagers  traversing  the  British  seas  in  all  the  pride  and  pomp  of  discovery, 
exploring  our  desert  channels,  insulting  our  defenceless  havens,  and  smiling  at  our  little 
navy,  a  few  wicker-boats  bound  round  with  leather. 

The  Greeks  did  not  regard  the  natives  of  the  Scilly  Isles  as  perfect  barbarians,  though 
the  general  inhabitants  of  Britain  were  represented  in  that  character  by  much  later 
intruders.  The  Scilly  Isles  were  not  only  distinguished  by  the  title  of  Cassiterides,  in 
consequence  of  their  produce,  but  also  by  that  of  CEstrominides,  the  Isles  of  the  Furies, 
in  compliment  to  the  people,  who  were  clothed  in  black  garments,  girded  round  the  breast 
and  flowing  down  to  the  ancles,  carried  long  staffs  in  their  hands,  and  altogether  had  a 
very  imposing  and  diabolical  appearance*.  The  custom  of  wearing  clothes  of  any  de- 
scription bespeaks  some  degree  of  refinement,  and  though  these  furies  may  have  been 
rather  behindhand  in  the  arts  and  devices  of  the  tailor,  and  thus  have  provoked  the 
ridicule  of  the  coxcombs  from  Greece,  they  were  still  far  advanced  beyond  their  neighbours 
on  the  continent  of  Britain,  where 

"  As  yet  black  breeches  were  not " 

The  natives  of  Scilly  must  have  received  the  stuffs  with  which  they  clothed  themselves 
from  the  Phenicians,  and  no  doubt  their  general  habits  and  manners  must  have  been 
much  improved  by  their  intercourse  with  these  strangers.  It  is  extraordinary  that  the 
improvement  did  not  spread  more  widely;  that  Scilly,  which  is  not  more  than  eight 
leagues  from  Cornwall,  should  have  been  for  some  ages  the  seat  of  an  important  commerce 
that  extended  no  share  of  its  influence  to  any  other  part  of  Britain.  A  very  short  com- 
munication with  the  merchants  of  Greece  would  have  given  the  inhabitants  skill  and 
confidence  sufficient  to  have  crossed  the  channel  in  their  own  boats  from  Scilly  to  Cornwall, 
and  yet  we  can  only  account  for  the  partial  distribution  of  their  commercial  advantages^ 
by  supposing  an  impassable  barrier  between  the  islands  and  the  mainland.  Though  the 
Greeks  sailed  up  the  British  Channel,  and  assigned  names  to  the  promontories  as  they 

*  Strabo. 

passed, 


40  VOYAGE    ROUND    GRKAT    BRITAIN. 

passed,  yet  we  cannot  imagine  that  they  established  any  trade  either  in  Cornwall  or 
Devonshire,  for  it  is  inconceivable  that  after  a  long  intercourse  with  the  most  polished 
people  of  the  ancient  world,  with  no  natural  obstacles  to  oppose  its  diffusion  over  the 
whole  kingdom,  the  Britons  would  have  been  found  by  Julius  Coesar  to  be  a  nation  of 
savages. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  history  of  our  early  connection  with  the  Greeks  is  almost 
as  dark  and  uncertain  as  the  story  of  the  Trojan  Brutus.  Pliny  says,  that  Britain  was 
celebrated  in  the  monuments  of  the  Greeks,  but  this  intimation  can  only  excite  a  hopeless 
curiosity,  for  these  monuments  have  perished,  and  nothing  can  be  collected,  to  the  honour 
of  our  island,  from  the  ancient  Greek  authors  that  have  come  down  to  us,  but  a  few 
scattered  notices,  which  merely  reiterate  that  it  was  a  land  of  tin. 

Hertland  Point,  in  addition  to  its  high-sounding  cognomen  of  Herculis  Promontorium, 
has  other  distinctions ;  it  is  the  most  western  cape  of  Devonshire,  and  the  south-west 
boundary  of  Bideford  Bay.  At  this  point  the  coast  changes  its  direction,  and  turns 
abruptly  to  the  eastward.  If  we  had  proceeded  by  sea,  this  alteration  Avould  have  pro- 
cured us  a  fair  wind,  and  it  likewise  favoured  our  land-passage,  which  after  a  few  more 
tacks  became  gradually  more  equable  and  direct.  The  coast  soon  assumed  a  new  character, 
and  one  perfectly  distinct  from  any  that  we  had  hitherto  observed.  We  had  seen  vastness 
and  ruggedness  in  many  varieties  of  form,  but  in  every  form  composed  of  the  same 
material,  naked  rock.  In  Cornwall  all  vegetation  sickens  as  it  approaches  the  sea,  and 
becomes  fainter  and  fainter  till  there  is  not  a  tuft  of  grass  left  to  mingle  with  the  rocks, 
nor  a  sod  of  earth  on  which  grass  could  grow.  But  here,  at  the  distance  of  not  more  than 
five  leagues  from  the  northern  extremity  of  Cornwall,  the  cultivation  of  the  interior 
advances  in  all  its  vigour  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  land,  and  the  cliffs,  from  their  sum- 
mits to  the  water's  edge,  are  covered  with  verdure  and  fringed  with  wood.  In  rudeness 
and  grandeur,  which  are  undoubtedly  the  first  qualities  of  coast-scenery,  and  of  which 
rocks  are  the  proper  element,  no  coast,  perhaps,  round  England  is  equal  to  the  coast  of 
Cornwall ;  but  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  even  grandeur  loses  its  interest,  and  we  had 
had  quite  measure  enough  to  make  us  enjoy  with  uncommon  vivacity  the  renewal  of 
nature  in  buttercups  and  daisies.  After  having  been  so  long  accustomed  to  view  the  sea 
raging  over  projections  and  through  chasms  of  rock,  it  was  quite  delightful  to  catch  partial 
glimpses  of  it  through  the  tangled  branches  of  trees,  or  to  see  the  waves  falling  at  the  foot 
of  a  sloping  bank  overspread  Avith  grass  and  speckled  with  flowers.  As  we  advanced  the 
prospect  still  improved  in  beauty,  and  the  whole  country,  from  the  sea  to  the  horizon  over 
land,  was  extended  in  uniform  luxuriance ;  infinitely  diversified  in  surface,  but  with  hill 
and  valley  equally  teeming  with  vegetation.  This  lovely  scenery  continued  uninterrupted 
to  Clovelly,  which  we  entered  through  the  grounds  of  Sir  James  Hamlyn,  comprehending 
in  them  the  highest  beauties  of  Devonshire,  with  every  embellishment  that  art  can  give, 
disposed  with  judgment  and  taste. 

The 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  41 

The  town  of  Clovelly  is  built  on  the  acclivity  of  a  very  steep  hill  overhanging  the 
sea,  so  steep,  indeed,  as  to  have  very  much  the  character  of  a  precipice.  When  seen  from 
the  bottom  the  houses  have  a  most  singular  appearance,  rising  step  by  step,  with  the  roof 
of  one  house  below  the  base  of  another,  and  so  running  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  suspended 
like  pictures  against  a  wall.  There  are  some  disadvantages  resulting  from  this  mode  of 
building,  amongst  which  I  particularly  noticed  that  the  chimneys  of  the  lower  houses  regu- 
larly vomit  forth  their  smoke  into  the  parlour  windows  of  those  above  them.  In  labouring 
up  or  sliding  down  the  steep  steps  of  the  town,  one  ought  to  possess  the  lungs  and  legs  of 
a  Welsh  poney,  to  travel  with  any  degree  of  comfort  or  security.  At  Clovelly  a  man  can- 
not step  up  to  chat  with  a  neighbour,  a  cloud  or  two  above  him,  without  expending  more 
breath  in  the  journey  than  would  be  sufficient  for  an  hour's  talk,  so  that  if  not  very  long- 
winded  he  must  give  up  all  hope  of  long  stories.  But  these  are  circumstances  which  can 
disturb  only  the  residents  in  the  place ;  to  people  passing  through  it  in  pursuit  of  the  pic- 
turesque they  are  cources  of  satisfaction.  It3  singular  inconveniences,  informal  chimneys, 
and  vertical  street,  hr.ve  to  the  eye  a  very  pretty  effect.  It  has  one  other  appointment 
too,  best  to  be  appreciated  by  strangers;  a  very  good  inn,  recommended  by  plenty, 
cleanliness,  great  civility,  and  moderate  charges. 

I  mentioned  the  re-appearance  of  trees  to  the  westward  of  Clovelly,  but  the  cliffs 
immediately  about  it  are  so  loaded  with  them,  and  their  branches  and  leaves  are  so  inter- 
laced and  matted  together,  that  they  form  one  close  and  compact  mass,  as  impervious  as  a, 
jungle  of  blackberry  bushes.  I  do  not  represent  this  as  particularly  ornamental,  but  think 
it  might  be  an  improvement  were  this  exuberance  corrected,  though  the  pruning-hook  is 
generally  so  unnecessary  an  instiument  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sea,  that  something- 
may  be  said  in  favour  of  the  excess  for  the  sake  of  its  singularity.  Besides,  the  trees  arc 
all  low,  and  if  the  sea  prevents  their  growing  tall,  it  would  be  merciless  to  check  the  only 
inclination  which  they  are  permitted  to  indulge,  that  of  growing  broad.  However  excep- 
tionable they  may  be  in  form,  they  are  of  the  brightest  green,  a  very  rare  colour  on  the 
coast,  and  sufficient  in  itself  to  give  it  liveliness  and  beauty. 

There  is  a  good  harbour  at  Clovelly,  not  infested  by  those  hideous  rocks  which  we 
had  so  often  seen  starting  up  above  water  in  the  very  mouths  of  havens,  and  lying  like 
snares  in  the  way  of  every  vessel  that  approached.  The  business  of  the  port  is  principally 
fishing,  and  it  is  very  evident  from  the  refuse  of  heads,  tails,  and  fins,  which  manure  the 
beach,  that  the  shores  swarm  with  fish.  Turbot  and  soles  of  the  finest  quality  are  caught 
in  great  profusion,  and  there  being  no  fishmongers  but  the  fishermen,  they  are  sold  at  a 
price  proportioned  to  their  quantity.  A  London  fishmonger  would,  no  doubt,  be  able  to 
prove  that  this  is  a  very  injudicious  plan,  as  it  affects  the  seller ;  but  then  one  does  not 
exactly  see  why  his  interest  alone  should  be  consulted,  nor  why  twenty  hungry  stomachs 
should  remain  unappeased  because  he  finds  his  account  in  satisfying  only  one.  A  society 
was  formed  some  time  ago  for  the  purpose  of  redressing  this  grievance,  but  nothing 

appears 


42  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

appears  to  have  been  done,  and  the  metropolis,  which,  it  has  been  proved,  might  be  sup- 
plied with  an  abundance  offish,  at  an  average  rate  of  fourpence  a  pound,  still  has  it  doled 
out  by  a  few  individuals,  with  such  scrupulous  economy,  that  two-thirds  of  its  inhabitants 
receive  none  at  all,  and  the  remainder  less  than  they  could  consume,  at  an  expense  more 
than  adequate  to  furnish  plenty  for  the  whole.  It  is  much  easier  to  find  fault  than  suggest 
remedies,  but  if  this  evil  is  really  occasioned  by  an  iniquitous  combination  of  a  few  fish- 
mongers, it  appears  obvious  that  it  might  be  removed  by  facilitating  competition,  or 
dividing  the  business  amongst  more  hands,  and  that  this  object  might  be  effected  by 
establishing  several  spacious  fish-markets  in  different  parts  of  the  town,  which  would  be 
convenient  of  access  for  all  the  inhabitants,  secure  for  the  salesmen  a  certain  demand,  and 
for  the  buyers  a  certain  supply  at  a  certain  price.  There  being,  at  present,  only  one  fish- 
market  in  London,  and  that  small  and  confined,  and  not  accessible  to  a  fourth  part  of  the 
town,  the  constant  complaint  of  the  fishermen  is,  that  there  is  no  demand,  and  of  the 
public,  that  there  is  no  supply,  while  the  fishmongers  stand  between,  and,  naturally 
enough,  check  the  supply  and  stimulate  the  demand  with  a  view  to  nothing  but  their  own 
advantage.  The  plan  of  appointing  more  markets  was  proposed  in  a  report  of  the  Fish 
Association,  and  the  only  difficulties  that  oppose  its  execution  seem  to  be  some  legal 
impediments.  But  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  these  impediments  are  not  insurmountable, 
and  that  some  means  may  be  adopted  for  making  that  legal  which  would  be  so  widely 
beneficial. 

At  Clovelly  I  observed,  at  low  water,  that  the  whole  surface  left  dry  by  the  tide  was 
covered  with  fragments  of  rock,  not  bedded  into  the  sand,  but  lying  loosely  on  it  and  each 
other,  and  all  rounded  and  polished  by  continual  collision  and  friction  in  the  turbulent 
sea.  These,  no  doubt,  are  the  remains  of  former  cliffs,  washed  down  by  the  waves,  and 
they  now  form  a  barrier  which  protects  the  present  cliffs  against  farther  depredations. 
Thus  the  sea,  with  only  its  ordinary  means  of  aggression,  never  advances  far  upon  a  rocky 
shore.  When  it  flows  over  a  smooth  surface,  and  can  employ  a  large  and  unbroken  body 
of  water,  it  may  undermine  the  bottoms  of  cliffs,  though  composed  of  the  hardest  rock, 
but  the  first  fall  of  the  superincumbent  matter  raises  obstructions  to  its  farther  progress, 
and  the  land  merely  plants  a  few  of  its  rocks  as  outposts  for  the  defence  of  the  main  body. 
When  the  coast  consists  of  sand  or  chalk  the  sea  is  more  destructive,  and  is  assisted  by 
other  agents,  the  most  considerable  of  which  are  frosts  and  thaws.  The  ruins  of  cliffs, 
composed  of  these  soft  materials,  are  of  no  service,  but  are  speedily  washed  away  by 
the  waves,  which  return  unchecked  to  new  conquest. 

Three  miles  to  the  eastward  of  Clovelly,  Bideford  Bay  having  reached  its  central 
point  of  recess,  the  coast  again  edges  away  to  the  northward.  For  some  miles  the  cliffs 
preserve  much  the  same  appearance  as  at  Clovelly,  and  are  still  covered  with  low  trees, 
rather  tame  and  uniform  in  outline,  but  still  with  the  recommendation  of  being  perfectly 
green,  and  of  furnishing  at  least  one  visible  sign  by  which  summer  may  be  separated  from 

winter. 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  43 

winter.  And  this  is  no  mean  recommendation  on  the  coast,  where  there  is  usually  only  one 
broad  discrimination  between  the  two  elements  of  land  and  water;  where  one  is  evidently 
solid  and  the  other  fluid,  but  where  the  difference  is  only  between  a  dry  desert  and  a  wet  one. 
The  green  cliffs  were  at  length  interrupted  by  sand,  which  has  accumulated  in  a  prodigious 
quantity  at  the  confluence  of  the  rivers  Taw  and  Torridge  with  each  other  and  the  sea, 
and  is  from  thence,  as  a  focal  point,  scattered  abroad  for  many  miles  in  every  direction. 
We  remained  constant  to  the  cliffs  as  long  as  the  trees  remained  so,  and  then  turned  from 
them  to  the  right,  that  we  might  avoid  two  sides  of  a  triangle  of  sand,  and  soon  arrived 
at  the  western  bank  of  the  Torridge,  and  at  the  little  village  of  Appledore.  The  river  is 
the  most  important  object  of  the  two.  We  had  seen  it  oozing  from  its  spring,  not  many 
yards  from  the  source  of  the  Tamar,  and  we  now  found  it  again  at  its  mouth,  spread  into 
a  noble  stream  and  mingling  with  the  Taw.  Had  our  voyage  been  in  an  untravelled 
country,  to  have  traced  two  fine  rivers  to  one  head  had  been  worth  a  kingdom, 
but  to  have  followed  one  of  them  to  the  sea,  and  there  beheld  it  united  with  another  and 
a  different  fine  river,  had  been  a  discovery  beyond  all  price.  The  Taw  rises  on  Dartmoor, 
and  flows  to  the  northward  till  it  is  reinforced  by  the  Moule  near  Chumleigh,  and  swelled 
into  a  bold  river;  it  then  inclines  to  the  N.N.W.  till  it  reaches  Barnstaple,  where  it  again 
alters  its  course,  and  turning  to  the  westward,  meets  the  Torridge  at  Appledore,  and  runs 
with  it  in  one  stream  to  the  sea,  about  half  a  mile  below  the  village. 

The  waters  both  of  the  Taw  and  the  Torridge  are  charged  with  an  extraordinary  quan- 
tity of  sand  and  slime,  which  from  the  rapidity  of  their  course  they  hold  in  suspension  till 
they  approach  the  sea,  where,  spreading  over  a  wider  area  and  flowing  in  a  more  gentle 
current,  they  deposit  their  feculence,  and  gradually  elevate  their  beds  and  decrease  their 
depth.  At  Appledore  these  united  rivers  are  at  high  water  a  mile  in  breadth,  but  are 
navigable  only  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  where  the  velocity  of  the  current  still  preserves 
the  channel  free  from  obstructions.  At  low  water  they  shrink  into  a  narrow  stream,  so 
studded  with  shoals  and  sand  banks  as  to  be  impassable  for  any  thing  but  a  small  boat. 
At  their  common  mouth  there  is  a  dreadful  bar,  which  renders  all  navigation  to  Appledore, 
Barnstaple,  and  Bideford,  difficult  and  precarious.  The  sea  co-operates  with  the  rivers  in 
creating  bounds  to  their  mutual  dominion,  and  by  continually  forcing  in  a  counter 
current  of  sand,  has  raised  it  up  in  a  sharp  ridge,  which  is  never  quite  covered 
with  water  till  the  tide  has  flowed  for  three  hours.  This  mischief,  which  is  so  considerable 
in  the  Taw  and  Torridge,  affects  all  rivers  in  a  degree.  None  has  suffered  more  from 
the  same  causes  than  our  grand  river,  the  Thames.  For  many  leagues  to  the  westward  of 
the  Nore  there  is  one  continued  maze  of  sands  and  shoals,  of  more  intricate  and 
dangerous  navigation  than  any  other  part  of  the  British  Channels.  These  sands  are,  no 
doubt,  the  accumulated  sediment  of  the  river,  which  from  the  Nore  rapidly  increases  its 
surface  and  loses  its  velocity,  preserving  a  free  course  only  in  mid-channel,  and  refining 
itself  on  each  side  as  it  lazily  creeps  along. 

o  The 


44  VOYAGE    ROUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

The  village  of  Appledore  contains  two  parallel  rows  of  small,  neat,  compact  dwelling- 
houses,  which  afford  no  very  interesting  matter  for  description.  The  houses  are  all 
white-washed,  and  as  limestone  is  abundant  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  white-wash  is  so 
often  renewed  that  they  have  always  an  air  of  spruceness  and  prodigal  tidiness  about, 
them,  very  creditable  to  the  cleanliness  of  the  inhabitants,  but  certainly  not  so  picturesque 
as  the  irregularities  of  Clovelly  and  the  untempered  rudeness  of  St.  Agnes  and  Portreath. 
If  an  artist  should  desire  to  find  a  subject  amongst  these  cottages  he  must  see  them  Avhen 
stained  by  the  inclemencies  of  Avinter,  for  if  he  waits  till  the  spring  he  will  find  himself 
anticipated  by  a  rival  brush,  that  will  have  quite  daubed  him  out  of  countenance. 

There  is  very  little  of  the  bustle  of  trade  at  Appledore  ;  we  saw  six  or  seven  small 
sloops  there,  and  were  told  that  such  a  fleet  was  not  often  seen  except  in  the  winter  time, 
when  bad  weather  drove  vessels  in  for  shelter.  This  port  is  the  first  within  the  bar;  but 
this  advantage  of  situation  has  been  submerged  by  the  sand,  and  it  cedes  in  depth  of 
water,  and  consequently  in  commercial  importance,  to  the  more  inland  ports  of  Barnstaple 
and  Bideford. 

It  was  at  Appledore  that  Hubba,  the  Dane,  in  the  reign  of  Alfred,  disembarked 
with  an  army  from  twenty-three  ships,  after  having  spread  devastation  and  slaughter 
over  Wales.  On  landing  he  immediately  laid  siege  to  the  castle  of  Kinwith,  where 
Oddune,  Earl  of  Devonshire,  and  his  followers  had  taken  shelter.  "  Being  ill  sup- 
plied with  provisions  and  even  with  water,  the  earl  determined  by  some  vigorous 
blow  to  prevent  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  the  barbarous  enemy.  He  made  a 
sudden  sally  on  the  Danes  before  sun-rising,  and  taking  them  unprepared,  he  put 
them  to  rout,  pursued  them  with  great  slaughter,  killed  Hubba  himself,  and  got  possession 
of  the  famous  Reafen  or  enchanted  standard,  in  which  the  Danes  put  great  confidence. 
It  contained  the  figure  of  a  raven,  which  had  been  inwoven  by  the  three  sisters  of  Hinguar 
and  Hubba,  with  many  magical  incantations,  and  which  by  its  different  movements 
prognosticated,  as  the  Danes  believed,  the  good  or  bad  success  of  any  enterprize  *."  The 
news  of  this  victory  reached  the  ears  of  Alfred  in  his  retreat  at  Athelney,  and  quickened 
his  exertions  for  the  complete  redemption  of  his  kingdom.  It  was  immediately  after  this 
event  that  he  passed  in  the  disguise  of  a  minstrel  through  the  camp  of  his  enemies.  The 
Danes,  after  their  defeat  by  the  Earl  of  Devonshire,  buried  their  captain,  Hubba,  on  the 
shore,  near  the  place  where  he  had  landed,  and  piled  over  him  a  heap  of  stones,  the 
customary  monument  in  those  times  of  heroes  who  had  died  in  battle.  All  vestiges  of  this 
monument  have  been  swept  away  many  ages  since,  but  there  is  a  spot  a  little  above  the 
village  of  Appledore,  called  Hubblestone,  which  still  points  out  to  those  who  are  not  to  be 
startled  by  a  letter,  the  grave  of  Hubba.  It  is  singular  that  tradition  should  have 
consecrated  for  so  long  a  period  this  spot  of  earth,  for  in  the  minds  of  the  people  in  the 

*  Hume. 

neighbourhood, 


VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  45 

neighbourhood,  Hubblestone  has  at  present  as  little  connexion  with  the  name  of  Hubba, 
as  of  Julius  Caesar.  I  enquired  of  the  man  who,  at  my  request,  conducted  me  to  the 
place  why  it  was  called  Hubblestone;  and  he  looked  at  me  Avith  as  much  illumination  in 
his  countenance  as  if  I  had  asked  him  why  he  was  called  Jones.  Fame  has  not  done  so 
much  justice  to  the  gallant  Earl  of  Devonshire  as  to  Hubba,  and  has  immortalised  no 
stone  of  Kinwith  Castle  by  which  we  can  determine  where  it  stood.  Risdon,  in  his  Survey 
of  Devonshire,  begun  in  the  year  1605,  observes,  "  For  this  castle  some  have  sought,  as 
it  were  for  ants  paths,  but  found  it  not,  unless  they  guess  Henna  borough,  a  fort  not  far 
hence,  to  be  the  same,  which  conjecture  I  partly  ground  upon  the  name,  that  not  much 
differs  after  the  revolution  of  so  man}^  ages."  This  congruity  of  names  is  still  the  only 
bond  of  union  between  Kinwith  and  Hennaborough,  and  we  must  prize  it  accordingly. 

We  did  not  advance  farther  up  the  Taw  or  the  Torridge  than  Appledore.  The 
original  plan  of  our  voyage  extended  simply  to  the  coast,  and  its  execution  will  form  too 
voluminous  a  work  to  admit  of  any  deviations  that  do  not  promise  ample  compensation. 
Barnstaple  is  nearly  three  leagues  inland,  and  therefore  quite  out  of  our  reckoning; 
and  Bideford,  Ave  understood,  though  nearer  the  sea,  offered  nothing  that  should  tempt  us 
out  of  our  regular  course.  The  port  of  Bideford  had  formerly  a  large  share  of  foreign 
commerce,  but  has  been  drained  by  a  series  of  wars,  and  has  now  only  a  few  coasting 
vessels  belonging  to  it,  which  carry  coals  and  culm  to  the  southern  parts  of  Devonshire. 

When  we  had  completed  our  observations  at  Appledore  we  had  a  few  hours  of 
day-light  remaining,  which  we  were  anxious  to  employ  in  advancing  for  a  few  miles,  that 
we  might  reach  Ilfracomb,  rather  a  long  stage,  the  next  day.  We  were  directed  to  cross 
the  water  and  proceed  to  the  village  of  Braunton,  at  a  little  distance  on  the  opposite  side, 
where  we  might  be  accommodated  for  the  night,  and  procure  horses  for  our  journey  the 
following  morning.  Some  difficulties  occurred  in  the  prosecution  of  this  simple  plan. 
The  wind  and  the  tide  were  foul,  but  the  ferry  man,  utterly  unmindful  of  these  particulars, 
set  his  sail  up  and  himself  down,  and  quietly  waited  the  result.  We  did  alter  our  situation, 
and  gradually  increased  our  distance  from  Appledore,  but  without  approaching  nearer  to 
the  place  to  which  we  were  bound.  The  river  is  not  quite  a  mile  broad,  so  that  when  this 
singular  mode  of  getting  over  it  had  been  prolonged  for  an  hour,  we  conceived  ourselves  jus- 
tified in  enquiring  when  we  might  expect  to  reach  our  port.  Our  phlegmatic  boatman  then 
first  made  us  acquainted  with  a  kind  of  misgiving  that  had  long  been  gaining  ground  over  his 
feelings,  and  had  now  terminated  in  a  conviction  that  our  sail  had  been  perfectly  useless, 
and  that  nothing  but  hard  labour  at  the  oars  could  enable  us  to  get  over  the  water.  He 
then  applied  himself  to  row,  and  in  an  hour  and  a  half  more  we  landed  on  the  opposite 
shore.  Braunton  was  full  three  miles  from  the  spot  where  we  landed,  and  it  was  almost 
bedtime  when  we  arrived  there,  and  learned  at  the  public  house  that  there  were  no  beds. 
We  immediately  burst  out  into  some  angry  expostulations  at  the  impertinence  of  holding  out 

professions 


46'  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

professions  of  entertainment  which  deluded  travellers  into  such  awkward  dilemmas,  but 
they  were  rather  coldly  received; — there  were  no  beds.  After  standing  for  some  time  in 
the  street  balancing  our  resources,  amidst  a  crowd  of  silent,  curious,  unsympathising 
spectators  who  had  collected  about  us,  we  finally  resolved  to  enter  the  house,  that  we 
might  sit  till  morning.  The  landlord  confirmed  one  half  of  our  expectations  by  procuring 
us  horses  at  an  early  hour;  and  we  departed  from  Braunton  in  that  bouncing  state  of 
spirits  which  usually  results  from  a  strong  inclination  to  sleep,  and  eyes  wide  open. 

On  returning  to  the  coast  we  found  nothing  that  demanded  very  wakeful  attention, 
but  droned  drowsily  along  for  two  leagues  over  a  bed  of  sand,  till  we  arrived  at  Baggy 
Point,  the  northern  boundary  of  Bideford  Bay.  This  headland  is  remarkable  from  standing 
alone,  a  majestic  steep  of  craggy  rock,  between  low  and  rounded  banks  of  sand.  It  is 
nearly  as  high  as  Hertland  Point,  and  we  contented  ourselves  with  observing  from  a  place 
of  security,  that  it  was  in  front  quite  perpendicular.  A  few  hours  after  we  had  left  the 
point  a  pilot  vessel  was  wrecked  upon  the  rocks  at  its  base.  The  weather  was  perfectly 
calm,  and  she  had  ventured  so  close  to  the  shore,  that  before  she  could  clear  the 
headland,  the  flood  tide,  which  sets  in  with  great  violence,  drove  her  on  to  the  rocks. 
She  had  a  small  boat  on  deck  by  which  all  the  crew  were  saved. 

To  the  northward  of  Baggy  Point  we  entered  upon  another  dreary  flat,  three  miles  in 
extent,  called  Woollocombe  Sands,  over  which  we  passed  without  one  jolt  of  the  body  or 
the  mind.  Two  miles  more,  equally  sedative,  over  Mort  Bay,  brought  us  to  Mort  Point. 
Adjoining  the  bay  is  the  parish  of  Morthoe,  where  there  formerly  stood  a  wonderful  stone, 
called  Mortstone,  which  was  only  to  be  removed  by  the  power  of  ladies  who  were  lords  of 
their  husbands.  I  made  some  enquiries  on  the  subject,  and  was  informed  that  the  stone 
had  long  since  disappeared.  Morthoe  is  a  very  small  parish. 

The  encroachments  of  the  sand  are  bounded  by  Mort  Point,  and  from  this  headland 
we  had  no  longer  to  complain  of  the  opiate  smoothness  of  our  way,  but  had  all  our  senses 
kept  in  constant  exercise  by  the  trips  of  our  horses,  over  a  road  of  the  liveliest  ruggedness. 
The  coast  became  exceedingly  grand,  rising  to  the  height  of  eight  hundred  feet,  and 
inclining  to  the  sea  in  a  sweeping  slope,  partially  spread  with  grass  and  tufted  with  low 
trees,  or  striking  down  to  it  at  once  in  a  tremendous  precipice,  with  the  naked  rock 
exposed  in  abrupt  crags.  In  some  places  there  was  in  front  of  the  cliffs  a  singular 
mixture  of  nakedness  and  vegetation,  and  rocks,  and  grass,  and  trees,  were  blended 
together,  as  if  some  recent  convulsion  had  overturned  the  solid  beds  of  rock,  and  spared 
some  patches  of  the  former  surface,  a  bramble  or  a  green  sod,  as  memorials  of  the  change. 
But  the  vastness  of  the  scene  was  the  spell  that  at  once  filled  and  controuled  the  mind, 
and  simplifying  attention,  left  us  little  to  do  when  standing  on  these  heights  but  to  ponder 
on  the  wide  horizon.  As  we  looked  over  the  sea  the  sight  had  no  specific  object  to  rest 
upon,  but  was  carried  farther  and  farther  over  one  broad,  level  surface,  which  terminated 

in 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  47 

in  a  soft  misty  line  and  melted  into  the  sky.  The  void  over  our  heads  appeared  less  vast 
than  that  before  us,  in  which  the  sea  acted  as  a  scale,  or,  like  the  line  from  a  kite,  as  a 
conductor  to  the  eye. 

From  these  boundless  visions  we  were  occasionally  recalled  to  ourselves  by  a 
perpendicular  peep  at  the  rocks  below  us,  followed  by  a  deliberate  step  backwards,  to 
counteract  that  involuntary  impulse,  which  on  these  occasions,  seems  perversely  to  be 
pushing  and  edging  one  on.  A  man  will  thrust  half  of  his  body  out  of  his  garret  window, 
without  fear  or  thought  of  a  fall ;  but  let  him  ascend  two  or  three  hundred  feet  higher,  and 
though  the  necessity  of  falling  may  not  be  more  obvious,  and  though  the  consequences  of 
falling  would  not  be  more  fatal,  yet  he  immediately  begins  to  tremble,  and  intrench 
himself  in  his  strong  holds.  When  we  look  from  an  eminence  only  fifty  feet  high,  it  may 
require  an  effort  of  calculation  to  convince  us  that  we  should  be  killed  if  we  were  to  fall ; 
but  when  we  look  from  a  height  of  seven  or  eight  hundred  feet,  the  certainty  of  being 
dashed  to  pieces  if  a  foot  should  slip  is  so  vividly  illustrated,  that  there  appears  to  be 
danger  in  the  mere  contemplation  of  a  fall ;  death  is  represented  as  so  very  certain  that 
we  imagine  it  to  be  very  near.  We  are  sensible  of  the  same  kind  of  feeling  when  the  eye 
is  not  the  medium  through  which  terror  is  received.  A  man  will  stand  with  perfect 
confidence  at  the  very  brink  of  a  pool  which  he  conceives  may  contain  just  water  enough  to 
cover  his  head,  but  signify  to  him  that  the  pool  has  no  bottom,  and  he  will  instantly  start 
back  that  he  may  not  be  drowned. 

From  the  headland  of  Bull  Point,  distant  rather  more  than  a  mile  from  Mort  Point* 
the  coast  extends  no  farther  to  the  northward,  but  turning  to  the  eastward,  continues  in 
that  direction  to  the  mouth  of  the  Severn.  From  Bull  Point,  the  Bristol  Channel  becomes 
gradually  narrower,  the  opposite  coast  of  Wales  running  to  the  E.  S.  E.  till  it  reaches  the 
mouth  of  the  Severn,  from  whence  both  coasts  again  incline  to  the  northward,  regularly 
converging  to  a  point 

Our  horses  were  the  first  to  signify  any  distaste  for  our  mountainous  course,  and  we 
were  at  length  obliged,  for  the  sake  of  speed  and  security,  to  dismount.  When  we  had 
walked  for  an  hour  we  ourselves  began  to  suspect  that  hills  would  be  more  agreeable  if 
they  were  all  top,  and  recalled  to  mind  Woollocombe  Sands,  without  reproaching  them 
for  their  flatness.  Nearly  at  the  end  of  our  journey  and  our  breath,  we  arrived  at  the 
base  of  a  height  of  longer  and  steeper  ascent  than  any  that  we  had  yet  passed :  after  a  very 
laborious  effort,  with  our  noses  almost  as  close  to  the  ground  as  our  feet,  we  reached  the 
top,  and  then  descended  into  Ilfracombe.  The  descent  had  become  very  easy  and  gradual 
before  we  entered  the  town,  the  first  object  in  which  is  the  church,  a  neat,  respectable 
edifice,  in  the  very  plainest  style  of  architecture,  which,  unlike  prouder  cathedrals,  has 
been  repaired  at  different  times,  by  different  hands,  without  betraying  any  marks  of 
disproportion,  and  without  exciting  any  regret  for  those  parts  that  have  been  lost,  or 

contempt 


48  VOTAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

contempt  for  those  that  have  been  renewed.  From  the  church,  the  town  extends  to  the 
sea-side  in  one  street,  about  a  mile  in  length,  of  suitable  breadth,  Avell  paved,  and  remark- 
ably clean.  As  nearly  the  whole  town  is  included  in  this  one  street,  it  is  almost 
superfluous  to  observe  that  the  houses  are  built  without  any  respect  for  regularity.  The 
tinker  is  of  course  a  window  narrower  and  a  story  lower  than  the  baker,  who  is  in  his 
turn  overtopped  by  the  butcher,  while  all  crouch,  in  due  subordination,  under  the  tower 
of  the  doctor.  But  in  spite  of  this  gradation  of  ranks,  the  general  appearance  of  the  town 
is  very  respectable,  and  to  our  eyes,  that  had  not  of  late  been  accustomed  to  palaces,  the 
street  of  Ilfracombe,  with  its  shops  and  its  pavement,  looked  quite  metropolitan.  At  the 
lower  part  of  the  town  there  are  some  good  houses  overlooking  the  sea,  which  are  inha- 
bited by  visitors,  who  frequent  this  place  for  the  purpose  of  sea-bathing. 

Ilfracombe  has  an  excellent  harbour,  easy  of  access,  yet  secured  against  any  injurious 
effects  of  wind  and  sea.  The  bason  of  the  harbour  is  surrounded  on  three  side's  by  the 
land,  and  on  the  fourth  is  protected  from  the  north  or  sea-wind  by  a  bold  mass  of  rock 
which  stretches  nearly  half  way  across  the  mouth,  and  leaves  open  just  sufficient  space  for 
the  entrance  of  vessels.  On  the  summit  of  this  rock,  which  rises  pyramidally,  is  erected  a 
lighthouse  for  the  direction  of  ships  in  the  night,  for  the  harbour  is  so  land-locked,  that 
light  is  almost  as  necessary  as  water  for  the  passage  into  it.  The  lighthouse  is  built  in  the 
form  of  a  chapel,  a  whimsical  fancy  that  has  treated  "  the  genius  of  the  place"  rather  too 
cavalierly.  No  one  would  think  of  fixing  a  chapel  of  ease,  really  dedicated  to  the  uses  of 
a  chapel,  on  the  top  of  a  high,  steep,  rugged  rock  ;  therefore  this  lighthouse,  in  its  charac- 
ter of  disguise,  simply  stands  as  a  model  of  inconvenience.  The  harbour  is  still  further 
inclosed  and  defended  by  an  artificial  pier,  on  Avhich  the  following  inscription  is  engraved 
on  a  stone  tablet : 

"  THIS  EXTENSIVE  PIER, 

BUILT  SOME  YEARS  SINCE  BY  THE  MUNIFICENCE  OF  THE  BOUCHIERS, 
BARONS  FITZWARINE,  EARLS  OF  BATHE,  AND  VICE-ADMIRALS  OF  THE  PLACE, 

WAS  IN  THE  YEAR  H60  PARTLY  REBUILT, 

LENGTHENED  AND  ENLARGED  BY  SIR  BOUCHIER  WREY,  BART. 
THE  PRESENT  LORD  AND  INHERITOR  OF  THIS  PIER  AND  MANOR." 

The  commerce  of  the  port  is  confined  to  a  few  coasting  traders,  but  the  harbour  offers 
a  certain  shelter  to  all  vessels  navigating  the  Bristol  channel,  Avhich  in  bad  weather  arc 
excluded  by  the  bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  Taw  and  Torridge  from  the  harbours  of  Barn- 
staple  and  Bideford. 

The  general  scenery  about  Ilfracombe  would  furnish  matter  for  a  complete  vocabu- 
lary of  the  picturesque;  hill,  valley,  wood,  rock,  and  water,  all  distributed  into  an  arrange- 
ment 


Ilfracombe,  Coast  of  North  Devon 


View  of  Ilfracombe,  from  Hilsborough 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  49 

ment  that  could  not  be  altered  and  improved.  To  the  east  and  west  of  the  harbour, 
the  bold  and  lofty  cliffs  faced  with  rock  stand  the  brunt  of  the  storms  from  the 
sea,  and  shelter  the  town,  the  harbour,  and  the  cultivated  fields  about  them.  I 
have  seldom  seen  any  thing  superior  in  richness  and  variety  to  the  land-prospect 
from  the  lighthouse  rock,  comprehending  the  harbour  crowded  with  vessels,  the  in- 
closed sea,  clear  and  smooth  as  a  mirror,  the  cliffs  in  front  wooded  from  top  to  bottom,  and  a 
vast  mountain  in  the  back  ground,  rising  above  all,  and  divided  into  meadows  and  corn 
fields — the  whole  seen  in  one  mingled  and  brilliant  view.  When  sated  with  the  luxuriance 
of  this  prospect,  the  eye  may  turn  from  it  and  repose  on  the  simple,  solemn  grandeur  of 
the  coast,  where  it  presents  its  dark  and  naked  rocks  to  the  open  sea.  Here  nature,  in- 
tent only  on  vastness,  has  been  sparing  of  all  embellishment,  nor  could  art  add  any  thing 
to  her  rough  outline,  or  by  any  form  of  improvement  either  alter  or  disguise  it. 

From  the  summit  of  Hillsborough,  a  tremendous  height  to  the  eastward  of  the  harbour, 
all  the  beauties  of  Ilfracombe  may  be  seen  spread  out  as  in  a  map,  with  its  rude  and  gen- 
tle features  contrasted,  its  woods  and  its  fields  edged  with  a  rugged  border  of  rock.  There 
are  many  other  points  from  which  all  the  objects  which  I  have  described  may  be  seen  to 
equal  advantage,  and  in  new  and  varied  combinations,  but  I  desist  from  any  further  re- 
presentation of  them  lest  I  should  fatigue  by  repetition  :  an  artist  who  could  give  force 
and  prominence  to  every  shade  of  difference  might  labour  for  months  at  Ilfracombe  with- 
out exhausting  his  subjects. 

Amongst  other  views  from  Hillsborough  we  caught  a  birds-eye  glimpse  of  the  coast 
to  the  eastward,  the  scene  of  our  future  operations,  extending  in  a  series  of  inequalities, 
that  determined  us  to  pursue  our  course  along  the  Devonshire   shore  by  sea.     We 
engaged  a  four-oared  boat,  and  at  a  very  early  hour  in  the  morning  embarked  on  our 
voyage,  with  a  strong  and  foul  wind,  and  the  tide  against  us.     This  arrangement  of 
circumstances  was  not  exactly  of  our  own  selection ;  the  wind  was  not  to  be  controuled, 
and  the  boatmen  assured  us  that  they  could  gain  ground  over  the  tide,  which  would 
turn  in  two  hours  after  our  departure,  and  find  us  prepared  to  take  the  earliest  advantage 
of  its  change.     Our  glimpse  of  the  coast  to  the  eastward  had  not  deceived  us.     For 
some  miles  it  is  strangely  irregular,  and  proves,  by  the  wild  disorder  of  the  rocks, 
the  confusion  of  the  strata,  the  deep  clefts  and  chasms,  and  the  fragments  that  line  the 
shore,  that  it  has  been  subject  to  some  great  convulsion.     The  cliffs  are  of  prodigious 
height,  yet  their  vast  front  is  hollowed  into  numberless  little  bays,  and  battered  and 
broken,  as  if  the  sea  had  risen  and  torn  down  the  rocks  from  their  very  summits.     In 
order  to  avoid  the  force  of  the  tide  we  were  obliged  to  keep  close  to  the  shore,  and 
follow  all  its  windings  :  in  the  sheltered  recesses  we  advanced  without  much  effort,  but 
round  the  projecting  points  the  tide  ran  with  such  velocity,  and  there  was  so  tumultuous 
a  sea,  that  it  required  extreme  labour  to  pull  the  boat  through  the  water,  and  a  miracle, 
as  we  sometimes  thought,   to  support  her  above  it.     We  were  surprised,  and  a  little 

shocked, 


50  VOYAGE    ROUXD    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

shocked,  at  the  boldness  with  which  the  man  approached  the  rocks,  on  which  there  was 
a  raging  surf.  The  management  of  the  helm  was  committed  to  my  hands,  and  I  was 
continually  called  to  order :  "  Keep  her  in,  sir ;  pray  keep  her  in,  out  of  the  tide,  and 
never  fear  the  rocks."  The  waves  which  threatened  to  throw  us  on  to  the  shore  were 
counteracted  by  the  recoil  of  the  waves  in  advance,  and  we  were  thus  held  in  balance 
between  them,  but  with  the  appearance  of  being  every  moment  about  to  be  dashed  to 
pieces.  We  had  not  only  to  fear  the  rocks  of  the  main  land,  but  had  to  steer  through  a 
perfect  labyrinth  of  them  in  the  sea,  starting  up  in  clusters  about  us,  or  discovered  by 
the  breakers,  or  by -a  dark  shadow  in  the  water  over  them.  At  low  water  they  are  seen 
in  large  masses,  full  half  a  mile  from  the  shore.  We  were  deploring  the  obstructions 
that  they  must  oppose  to  navigation,  when  our  boatmen  represented  to  us  that  if  it 
were  not  for  some  such  impediments  pilots  might  starve.  They  declared  that  the  rocks 
were  bread  to  themselves  and  their  families,  and  pointed  out  one  of  more  than  common 
terrors,  that  was  a  bit  of  roast  beef  on  a  Sunday.  How  natural,  or  at  least  common,  this 
mode  of  reasoning  is,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  illustrate  by  further  examples. 

We  at  length  arrived  opposite  to  a  point  of  land,  from  whose  base  the  rocks  project 
so  far  into  the  sea,  that  in  doubling  them  we  were  exposed  to  the  full  force  of  the  tide. 
Here  we  remained  stationary,  and  as  if  spell-bound,  for  ten  minutes,  the  men  straining 
with  all  their  might,  and,  in  their  rage,  startling  us  with  their  profane  wishes  that  they 
and  the  boat  might  go  to  the  bottom.  In  the  oral  chart  of  the  boatmen  along  shore 
this  terrible  point  is  emphatically  denounced  as  Pull-and-be-danmed  Point.  Perse- 
verance had  finally  its  just  reward  ;  we  doubled  the  point,  and  immediately  entered  into 
the  quiet  little  cove  of  Combe-Martin,  sheltered  from  wind  and  tide,  and  with  nothing 
to  disturb  our  contemplation  of  the  varied  scenery  around  us.  We  had  rowed  about 
four  miles  from  Ilfracombe,  in  which  interval  the  coast,  though  broken  and  indented, 
preserves  a  continued  line.  At  Combe-Martin,  a  deep  and  narrow  glen,  which  extends 
to  a  considerable  distance  inland,  separates  the  great  chain  of  cliffs,  and  terminates  in 
the  sea.  This  chasm  opened  to  us  a  view  of  uncommon  richness  and  fertility,  swelling 
over  the  masses  of  black  rock,  which,  on  each  side  of  the  bay,  form  the  base  of  the  land. 
Above  them  the  hills  rise  to  a  great  height,  and  are  cultivated  to  their  summits. 
Cultivation  can  make  even  a  flat  country  pleasing,  but  it  is  singularly  delightful  to  see 
mountains  thus  softened  and  subdued,  and  their  sharp  ridges  and  sudden  peaks  shaded 
with  trees  and  yellow  with  corn.  Vegetation  on  the  steep  sides  of  these  heights  does  not 
destroy  their  majesty,  for  it  has  none  of  the  trimness  of  art  about  it,  but  is  as  wild  and 
fantastic  in  arrangement  as  the  surface  over  which  it  is  spread.  The  whole  seems  like 
the  sole  work  of  nature ;  and  one  might  fancy  that  the  same  bold  hand  which  piled  the 
unhewn  rocks  below,  had  scattered  over  the  rising  hills  their  various  decoration. 

Round  the  whole  coast  we  had  seldom  seen  a  gap  in  the  cliffs  that  was  not  filled 
by  a  fisherman  and  his  boat,  and  the  little  inlet  of  Combe-Martin  is  fully  occupied  by  a 

few 


Near  Combmartin,  on  the  coast  of  North  Devon 


Lynmouth,  on  the  coast  of  North  Devon 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  51 

few  boats  on  the  beach,  and  by  a  group  of  cottages  beyond,  sufficiently  inartificial  in 
appearance  to  harmonize  with  the  general  scene.  They  are  situated  at  the  bottom  of  the 
glen,  which  on  each  side  is  overhung  by  hills  of  the  same  fertile  and  romantic  character 
as  those  which  skirt  the  bay. 

We  found  that  one  of  the  cottages  was  a  public-house,  with  no  promise  on  the  outside, 
but  furnished  with  plenty  within,  and  a  very  sensible  landlady,  who  maintained  that  nothing 
was  superior  to  a  good  breakfast,  which  she  regarded  as  the  foundation  on  which  every 
thing  useful  or  agreeable  in  the  business  of  the  day  was  to  be  raised.  We  were  precisely 
in  a  state  to  coincide  with  her  in  opinion,  and  to  admit,  that  no  circumstances,  however 
elevated,  can  make  us  forget,  for  any  length  of  time,  that  we  have  a  stomach.  Love  and 
jealousy  may  have  great  control  over  us,  but  in  the  long  run  we  are  slaves  to  nothing  so 
much  as  to  bread  and  butter. 

In  five  minutes  all  the  male  population  of  the  village  had  assembled  about  us  at  our 
meal;  and  ale,  a  great  leveller,  soon  determined  that  there  should  be  no  secrets  between 
us.  When  we  had  satisfied  all  their  questions,  they  revealed  to  us  that  they  gained  a  sub- 
sistence by  fishing  and  by  piloting  vessels  in  the  Bristol  Channel.  They  felt  themselves 
somewhat  scandalized,  however,  by  these  simple  pursuits,  and  reverted  with  pride  to  those 
days  when  a  little  honest  smuggling  cheered  a  man's  heart  at  Combe-Martin  with  a  drop 
of  unadulterated  gin.  "  But  these  are  cruel  times,"  they  observed,  "  and  the  Lord  only 
knows  what  we  shall  be  obliged  to  give  up  next."  They  were  occasionally  assisted,  they 
told  us,  by  a  wreck ;  but  this  was  a  very  uncertain  casualty,  and  scarcely  to  be  hoped  for 
twice  in  a  winter.  We  had  frequent  conversations  on  this  subject  with  various  boatmen 
during  our  voyage,  and  always  discovered  that  they  consider  it  in  no  degree  a  moral  offence 
to  plunder  a  wreck.  When  a  vessel  is  once  driven  ashore,  they  look  upon  it  as  justly 
lost  to  the  owners,  and  sent  to  be  fairly  scrambled  for  by  all  those  who  will  hazard  their 
lives  for  the  spoil.  They  pay  no  more  respect  to  the  construction  of  the  law  in  this  case, 
than  to  that  abominable  despotism  that  would  deprive  them  of  their  gin.  Amongst  them- 
selves, a  man  who  had  robbed  a  vessel  of  property  to  the  amount  of  fifty  pounds  might 
pass  for  a  very  honest  fellow;  but  if  he  were  known  to  have  stolen  a  pocket  handkerchief 
on  shore,  he  would  be  shunned  as  a  thief.  They  talk  of  a  good  wreck-season  as  they  do 
of  a  good  mackarel-season,  and  thank  Providence  for  both. 

When  we  returned  to  our  boat  the  tide  had  turned  and  the  wind  abated,  so  that  we 
proceeded  along  very  smoothly  and  pleasantly.  For  three  leagues  to  the  eastward  of 
Combe  Martin  the  coast  is  even  more  vast  than  that  which  we  had  just  passed.  Some  of 
the  cliffs  are  computed  to  be  a  thousand  feet  in  height,  and  they  are  so  steep,  that  when  we 
were  not  many  yards  from  their  base  we  could  distinguish  sheep  on  the  ridges  and  pro- 
jections at  their  summits.  These  sheep  appeared  like  white  specks,  so  very  minute  that 
we  should  not  have  observed  them  at  all  had  they  not  been  pointed  out  to  us  by  the  boat- 
men, nor  have  believed  that  they  were  animals  of  any  kind  had  we  not  perceived  that  they 

H  moved. 


52  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

moved.     We  were  contesting  the  matter  with  the  men,  with  our  eyes  intently  fixed  on  a 
cluster  of  the  white  specks,  when  they  suddenly  vanished,  and  we  then  granted  at  once 
that  they  could  not  be  daisies.     The  cliffs  are  generally  covered  with  short  russet  grass, 
and  in  parts  tufted  with  shrubby  oak;  but  the  rocks  are  frequently  seen  bursting  through 
this  surface,  and  at  intervals  all  vegetation  is  arrested ;  the  rocks  appear  rising  in  fragments 
over  fragments,  and  the  whole  front  looks  like  one  tremendous  ruin.     The  changes  which 
have  taken  place  on  the  face  of  this  coast  are  of  no  recent  date,  and  have  not  been  effected 
by  the  common  force  of  the  sea,  or  by  any  of  the  slow  causes  which  act  at  present  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  but  by  some  sudden  and  extraordinary  convulsion.  Some  of  the  cliffs 
preserve  deep  traces  of  a  violent  shock,  and  where  the  edges  of  the  rocks  are  disclosed 
the  strata  are  seen  broken  and  overturned ;  but  in  a  general  view  of  the  coast,  though  the 
ruin  still  appears,  it  appears  in  a  state  of  reparation,  and  the  sharp  peaks  and  rugged  in- 
dentations are  partially  smoothed  and  rounded  by  earth,  and  garnished  with  a  sprinkling  of 
vegetation.    This  coast  is  considerably  loftier  than  any  part  of  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall, 
but  it  has  not  the  same  wild  and  terrible  grandeur,  the  same  dismal,  desolate  gloom,  which 
was  always  associated  in  our  minds  with  shipwrecks  and  storms.    It  is  at  intervals  only  on 
the  coast  of  Devon  that  the  rocks  burst  forth;  but  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall,  league  after 
league  is  marked  by  one  dark  line  of  rock,  never  interrupted  by  a  patch  of  earth,  but 
parted  by  a  wide  chasm,  faced  also  on  each  side  with  rock,  and  again  renewed,  and  still 
in  rock.     Both  coasts  appear  to  have  been  shattered  by  some  tremendous  concussion,  but 
in  the  one  the  effects  have  been  gradually  softened  by  time,  while  in  the  other  the  con- 
fusion is  still  fresh  and  unreformed,  the  ruggedness  unvaried  and  untamed. 

Amongst  the  objects  that  attracted  our  particular  attention  after  leaving  Combe 
Martin  were  the  Big  Hangman  and  the  Little  Hangman,  two  projecting  cliffs,  more  rude 
in  form,  and  more  lofty  and  precipitous  than  the  cliffs  on  either  side  of  them,  and  there- 
fore distinguished  by  these  ferocious  titles.  The  Little  Hangman  is  only  little  when 
opposed  to  his  brother  monster;  and  when  we  saw  them  they  were  both  reduced  to  a  per- 
fect equality  by  the  clouds  that  had  settled  on  their  heads.  Two  leagues  farther  to  the 
eastward  there  is  a  very  magnificent  scene  of  rocks  bounding  the  Valley  of  Stones.  This 
valley  is  precisely  what  its  name  imports  it  to  be,  a  valley  whose  bottom  and  sides  are 
entirely  covered  with  stones.  We  could  see  nothing  of  it  from  the  sea,  but  we  saw  its 
character  copied  on  the  coast  in  so  profuse  a  display  of  stones  that  we  had  little  to  regret. 
About  two  miles  to  the  eastward  of  this  spot  are  the  little  bay  and  village  of  Lin- 
mouth,  surrounded  by  a  mixed  order  of  scenery,  in  which  the  beautiful  and  the  grand  are 
very  singularly  contrasted.  The  view  is  seen  to  most  advantage  from  the  sea,  and  as  we 
saw  it,  as  it  were,  by  surprise,  after  the  eye  had  been  long  bounded  by  one  vast  and  un- 
interrupted fence.  At  Linmouth  there  is  an  opening  in  the  cliffs,  and  through  this  there 
unexpectedly  dawns  upon  you  a  view  of  the  interior,  very  limited  indeed  in  extent,  but 
varied  and  picturesque,  and  a  little  village  in  the  place  of  the  rude  rocks  at  the  water's 

edge. 


VOYAGE  ROUND  CHEAT  BRITAIN.  53 

edge.  This  scene  was  suddenly  disclosed  to  us,  after  gazing  at  the  blank  rocks,  like  the 
glitter  and  show  of  the  stage,  by  the  drawing  up  of  the  curtain  at  a  theatre.  On  each  side 
of  the  bay  the  cliffs  taper  down  to  the  sea  in  two  bold  slopes,  covered  with  the  richest 
verdure,  and  abundantly  shaded  with  wood.  The  cottages  are  scattered  about  at  their 
base,  and  separated  into  two  divisions  by  a  fresh  water  stream,  the  Lyn,  which,  flashing 
and  foaming  over  a  bed  of  rocks,  gives  its  tiny  tribute  to  the  sea  with  great  noise  and  pre- 
tension. But  the  most  imposing  feature  in  the  prospect  is  a  huge,  rugged,  and  barren 
mountain  in  the  back  ground,  twelve  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  in  all  that  we  could  see 
of  its  front  completely  perpendicular.  This  mountain,  as  we  looked  at  it  from  the  sea, 
appeared  of  a  square  form,  standing  quite  alone,  unconnected  at  either  extremity  with 
any  other  land,  and  rising  at  once  from  the  plain  like  a  vast  wall.  Its  naked  front 
acquires  additional  dreariness  by  being  so  immediately  opposed  to  the  gentle  character  of 
the  two  sloping  points  in  the  fore-ground,  whose  green  pastures  and  bright  foliage  sparkle 
in  the  sun  with  more  than  common  lustre,  when  thus  set  off  by  this  bleak  mountain  in  their 
rear.  In  a  wider  prospect  the  effect  would  not  have  been  so  striking,  but  here  every  blade 
of  grass  has  its  force,  and  the  barrenness,  embodied  as  it  is  in  so  majestic  a  form,  is  per- 
fectly sublime. 

We  had  intended  to  make  Linmouth  the  boundary  of  our  day's  voyage,  but  discovered 
that  the  barrenness  which  had  so  happy  an  effect  in  the  back-ground  of  the  picture,  had 
advanced  into  the  public-house,  which  we  expected  to  see  smiling  with  a  ripe  harvest  of 
rolls  and  cheese.  This  unlooked-for  circumstance  drove  us  again  into  our  boat,  for  we 
had  quite  outlived  all  the  benefit  that  we  had  derived  from  our  foodful  landlady  at  Combe 
Martin.  After  two  or  three  strokes  of  the  oars  the  village  disappeared,  and  we  were  again 
shut  out  by  a  long  line  of  perpendicular  cliffs,  suspended  like  one  great  curtain.  The 
coast  to  the  eastward  of  Linmouth  becomes  less  strikingly  grand,  still  preserving  immense 
height,  but  more  tame  and  regular  in  form,  and  generally  rounded,  as  at  Clovelly,  from 
top  to  bottom,  by  a  solid  mass  of  low,  shrubby  trees.  Such  a  sight  in  Cornwall  we  should 
have  pronounced  to  be  beautiful,  but  we  were  now  so  familiarized  with  trees  that  we  had 
grown  fastidious,  and  hesitated  to  admire  a  bush  which  had  no  other  recommendation  than 
that  of  being  green.  But  if  there  was  less  to  interest  us  in  the  coast  to  our  right,  we  had  new 
objects  to  observe  by  the  development  of  the  coast  of  Wales  to  our  left;  and  as  the  channel 
became  narrower  at  every  mile  that  we  advanced,  we  amused  ourselves  with  watching  the 
forms  of  the  distant  land  as  they  gradually  grew  into  distinctness.  Soon  after  leaving  Ilfra- 
combe  we  had  observed  an  alteration  in  the  colour  of  the  sea,  which,  as  we  proceeded  to  the 
eastward,  exchanged  its  fresh  and  sparkling  hues  of  green  and  purple  for  one  plain  tinge 
of  mud.  \\  ith  land  visible  on  each  side  it  lost  likewise  all  its  grandeur,  as  well  as  all  the 
beauty  of  its  proper  colour;  but  then,  in  compensation,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing 
that  we  were  entirely  out  of  the  reach  of  ground-swells. 

About  two  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Linmouth  the  coast  of  north  Devon  terminates, 

but 


54  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

but  it  loses  itself  in  the  coast  of  Somersetshire  by  so  imperceptible  a  transition,  that  we 
could  not  decide  upon  the  exact  line  of  demarcation  between  them.  Our  boatmen,  who 
were  all  at  least  a  yard  asunder  in  their  opinions  on  the  subject,  proposed  to  determine 
the  question  by  a  wager,  of  which  we  never  heard  the  result. 

The  whole  extent  of  the  north  coast  of  Devonshire  is  about  fifty  miles.  The  distance 
from  Ilfracombe  to  its  eastern  extremity  is  twenty  miles,  and  in  this  interval  there  were 
only  two  places  at  which  we  could  land,  or  at  least  from  which  there  was  any  possibility  of 
access  into  the  interior.  Shipwrecks  on  such  a  coast  are  more  than  commonly  terrible. 
Instances  have  occurred  of  people's  escaping  from  a  wreck  on  to  the  rocks  at  low  water, 
and  being  swept  away  by  the  returning  tide  before  they  could  find  an  inlet  to  the  land. 
The  coast  of  Somersetshire,  after  continuing  for  four  miles  in  the  same  line  of  insurmount- 
able cliffs,  recedes  into  a  spacious  and  beautiful  bay,  with  the  hills  to  the  right  sloping 
gently  down  to  the  sea,  and  richly  cultivated;  a  few  scattered  cottages  in  front,  on  a 
streak  of  level  ground  bounding  the  sea,  and  overhung  by  a  grove  of  stately  trees,  rising 
abruptly  on  the  hills  behind,  and  a  majestic  headland  to  the  left  at  the  eastern  point  of 
the  bay,  of  rugged  and  naked  rock,  but  relenting  as  it  advances  into  the  recess,  and 
terminating  in  a  broader  plain  than  that  in  front,  chequered  also  with  cottages,  and  the 
mingled  colours  of  all  kinds  of  vegetation.  This  scene  was  the  more  interesting  to  us, 
like  that  at  Linmouth,  from  a  kind  of  unexpectedness  in  the  manner  of  its  disclosure,  and 
its  sudden  contrast  of  a  various  and  extended  prospect,  with  the  dead  wall  by  which  the 
eye  had  before  been  repelled. 

We  landed  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  bay  at  the  village  of  West  Porlock,  where  there 
is  little  for  me  to  record.  We  had  not  often  intruded  into  any  scene  of  life  in  which  life 
appeared  to  be  so  perfectly  becalmed.  There  are  periods  of  comparative  stagnation,  when 
we  say,  even  in  London,  that  there  is  nothing  stirring ;  it  is,  therefore,  not  surprising  that 
there  should  be  some  seasons  in  the  year  when  things  are  rather  quiet  at  West  Porlock. 
At  the  time  of  our  visit,  a  colony  of  dormice  in  the  winter  could  not  have  been  more  com- 
posed than  its  inhabitants.  In  the  herring-season  the  scene  changes,  the  people  awake 
and  come  out  of  their  holes,  every  face  is  full  of  anxiety,  every  hand  grapples  a  net,  and 
at  sea  and  on  shore  every  thing  is  stirring.  The  bay  is  not  supplied  with  any  variety  of 
fish  that  can  yield  the  fishermen  a  regular  employment,  and  we  learned  that  even  the 
herrings  appeared  in  thinner  shoals  than  formerly.  Some  years  since  they  were  caught  in 
great  quantities  many  miles  higher  up  the  channel,  but  now  only  a  few  straggling  divisions 
from  the  grand  body  penetrate  to  the  eastward  of  Porlock.  Their  capriciousness  is  as 
difficult,  I  believe,  to  be  accounted  for  as  to  be  corrected :  the  fishermen  attribute  it  to  a 
deficiency  of  food  for  them  on  the  coast,  but  this  they  can  only  conjecture,  for  when  the 
herrings  were  most  abundant,  every  other  kind  of  fish  was  equally  rare  as  at  present. 

There  were  two  spare  beds  in  one  room  at  the  public-house  of  the  village,  which  we 
determined  to  occupy  for  the  night.  As  we  were  retiring  to  them,  an  embassy  arrived 

from 


VOYAGE  ROUND  CHEAT  BRITAIN.  55 

from  the  tap-room,  representing  to  us  that  the  boatmen  could  procure  no  beds  for 
themselves,  and  that  it  was  their  particular  desire  that  we  should  content  ourselves  with 
one  bed,  while  they  four  resigned  themselves  to  the  other — and  all  this  in  a  room  ten 
feet  long  and  a  bed's  length  wide.  We  at  once  rebuffed  any  such  plan,  and  remained 
inexorable,  though  it  was  again  proposed  to  us  in  new  forms,  each  excluding  an 
individual  of  the  original  quartet.  Such  an  arrangement  had  been  sufficiently  odious  at 
any  time,  but  in  July — Spirits  of  lavender  defend  us  !  A  great  dash  of  assurance  in  the 
manners  of  boatmen  was  by  no  means  new  to  us,  but  such  an  instance  of  positive  rebellion 
as  this  stood  quite  alone. 

A  mile  and  a  half  from  this  village,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  is  the  parent 
village  of  Porlock,  in  which  is  the  parish  church.  We  entered  it  at  the  moment  when  all 
the  inhabitants  were  assembled  at  the  ceremony  of  a  funeral,  always  a  very  impressive 
scene  in  a  village,  where  no  one  is  too  insignificant  to  be  missed,  and  where  death  cannot 
select  without  taking  away  a  friend  or  an  acquaintance.  One  part  of  the  rites  was 
singular.  Before  the  procession  moved  to  the  church  all  the  mourners  met  before  the 
house  of  the  deceased,  and  there  chanted  a  hymn,  assisted  by  a  most  incongruous 
accompaniment  from  the  belfry,  in  which  a  merry  and  vigorous  peal  was  ringing  the 
whole  time.  The  sobs  and  cries  and  singing  of  the  people,  heard  only  at  intervals,  and 
indistinctly,  through  the  deafening  clangor  of  the  bells,  had  a  strange  and  most  mournful 
effect.  The  monstrous  contrast  of  sounds,  and  the  confusion  of  associations  raised  by 
them  in  the  mind,  evidently  affected  all  who  were  present,  and  they  were  much  more 
loud  and  passionate  in  their  grief  while  the  bells  were  pealing  in  their  ears,  than  during  any 
other  part  of  the  service.  I  imagined  that  this  custom  might  originally  have  had  some 
refined  moral  in  it,  and  that  a  man  was  thus  cheered  into  his  grave  in  consideration  of  what 
he  had  gained;  but  I  was  informed  that  the  ringing  of  the  bells  had  no  such  mystic  meaning, 
but  was  and  had  been  always  considered  as  a  simple  part  of  the  ceremony  of  mourning. 

Porlock  is  a  place  of  considerable  antiquity,  and  though  now  reduced  to  a  mean 
village,  was  a  town  of  some  note  in  the  time  of  the  Saxons,  and  distinguished  itself  on 
more  than  one  occasion  by  the  gallant  resistance  which  it  opposed  to  the  invasions  of  the 
Danes.  In  the  year  918,  a  Danish  army,  headed  by  the  earls  Ohtor  and  Rhoald,  after 
having  laid  waste  a  great  part  of  Wales,  landed  in  Porlock  Bay  during  the  night ;  but 
the  inhabitants  on  shore  having  received  notice  of  their  approach,  attacked  and  routed 
them  with  great  slaughter.  In  a  later  invasion,  though  they  fought  with  equal  resolution, 
they  had  not  the  same  success.  In  the  year  1052,  Harold,  earl  of  Essex,  with  a  large 
force,  composed  of  Irish  and  Danish  troops,  effected  a  landing  in  the  bay  in  spite  of  all 
opposition*.  He  then  formed  an  entrenched  camp,  and  leaving  a  sufficient  garrison  for 
its  defence,  marched  into  the  interior,  spreading  desolation  before  him.  The  town  of 
Porlock  was  reduced  to  ashes  by  this  barbarian,  and  never  rose  again  in  any  more 

*  Saxon  Chronicle,  An.  1052,  p.  166. 

important 


56  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

important  form  than  it  possesses  at  present.  The  trenches  of  Harold's  camp  are  still 
visible,  and  swords  and  other  instruments  of  war  have  frequently  been  dug  up  near  them. 
It  is  said  that  tradition  still  preserves  the  memory  of  all  these  transactions  fresh  in  the 
parish,  and  I  cannot  presume  to  deny  the  fact,  though  I  can  assert  that  the  tradition  is 
of  a  very  taciturn  disposition,  and  never  opens  its  lips  to  strangers.  In  our  conversation 
•with  the  natives  we  heard  of  the  harvest,  and  the  herrings,  and  other  notorious  matters 
of  modern  history,  but  not  a  syllable  of  Harold  or  the  ancient  town  of  Porlock. 

We  pursued  our  voyage  from  Porlock  Bay  to  Minehead,  a  distance  of  two  leagues, 
in  our  boat.  From  the  eastern  point  of  the  bay  the  coast  extends  in  a  straight  line  of 
cliffs  still  of  vast  height,  and  smoothed  into  one  unvaried  form  by  an  equal  covering  of 
brushwood,  till  it  terminates  in  the  promontory  of  Minehead.  To  the  eastward  of  this 
headland  there  is  a  long  flat,  which  continues  with  little  variation  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Severn.  Minehead  was  formerly  a  seaport  of  great  importance,  and  besides  a  very 
extensive  coasting  trade,  had  considerable  concerns  with  the  Straits  and  the  West  Indies. 
In  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  there  were  forty  vessels  belonging  to  it  engaged 
in  the  Irish  trade.  But  of  this  enlarged  and  various  commerce  there  are  no  traces 
remaining,  and  it  has  now  all  the  lifeless  stillness  of  Porlock,  which  is  here  the  more 
melancholy,  as  not  being  the  natural  inheritance  of  the  place,  but  the  consequence  of 
desertion  and  decay.  It  has  a  spacious  harbour,  formed  by  a  handsome  stone  pier,  and 
so  remarkably  secure,  that  in  the  year  1703,  when  a  violent  gale  of  wind,  accompanied 
with  a  very  high  tide,  committed  dreadful  ravages  on  this  coast,  Minehead  was  the  only 
harbour  that  could  defend  its  shipping. 

The  town  of  Minehead  is  distributed  into  three  divisions,  the  Quay  Town,  the  Middle 
Town,  and  the  Upper  Town,  and  this  strange  mode  of  separation,  together  with  the  sub- 
divisions, which  also  cut  each  part  into  pieces,  entirely  disguises  the  appearance  of  its  being 
a  town  at  all.  The  Quay  Town  is  the  most  regular,  and  is  composed  of  a  single  row  of 
small  but  neat  cottages,  built  on  the  sea-shore,  in  a  line  with  the  promontory  of  Minehead, 
which  though  covered  with  wood  in  front,  discloses  a  very  grand  display  of  rocks,  project- 
ing in  immense  masses  from  its  eastern  side.  Of  these  it  has  been  written  so  frequently 
and  so  long  ago,  that  they  threaten  to  fall  and  crush  the  cottages  beneath,  that  I  shall  not 
venture  to  reproach  them  with  any  such  intention.  Two  and  twenty  years  ago  the  whole 
of  this  part  of  the  town  was  destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  utter  loss  of  trade  and  all  spirit  of 
speculation  in  the  place,  is  mournfully  exhibited  in  many  ruins  of  blackened  walls  which 
still  remain  unrepaired. 

The  Middle  Town  is  nearly  half  a  mile  inland,  and  has  the  air  of  a  decent  village, 
with  more  streets  than  houses.  The  Upper  Town  is  situated  on  the  slope  of  a  steep  hill, 
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  Middle  Town,  and  is  the  most  insignificant  of  the 
three,  consisting  only  of  a  few  shabby  cottages,  which  it  would  take  less  time  to  pull  down 
than  to  describe. 

Minehead 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  57 

Minehead  is  a  borough-town,  and  returns  two  members  to  parliament,  who  are 
elected  by  such  of  the  parishioners  as  are  housekeepers,  and  do  not  receive  alms.  There 
is  an  alms-house  in  the  parish,  the  bequest  of  a  Mr.  Robert  Quirk.  An  inscription  on  a 
brass-plate  over  the  door  thus  energetically  sets  forth  Mr.  Quirk's  charitable  disposition  : — 

"  Robert  Quirk  built  this  house  Anno  1630,  and  doth  give  it  to  the  use  of  the  poore 
of  this  parish  for  ever.  And  for  better  maintenance  I  do  give  my  two  inner  cellers,  at  the 
inner  end  of  the  key  ;  and  cursed  be  that  man  that  shall  convert  it  to  any  other  use  than 
to  the  use  of  the  poore." 

Under  this  is  an  engraving  of  a  ship  and  the  following  couplet. 

''  God's  providence 

Is  my  inheritance.     R.  Q." 

The  country  around  Minehead  is  beautifully  diversified  with  hill  and  valley,  both 
teeming  with  the  most  exuberant  vegetation.  The  climate  is  so  mild  that  the  myrtle  tree 
will  live  here  throughout  the  year  in  the  open  air.  The  winters  bring  months  of  rain,  but 
are  rarely  attended  by  frosts  of  more  than  two  or  three  days  duration. 

Being  informed  that  we  should  meet  with  nothing  deserving  of  observation  on  this 
side  of  the  Bristol  channel  beyond  Minehead,  we  determined  to  pass  over  from  this  port  to 
Cardiff,  on  the  opposite  coast,  and  from  thence  commence  our  voyage  round  the  Welsh 
coast.     A  foul  wind  prevented  our  proceeding  so  far  to  the  eastward,  and  we  landed  nearly 
opposite  to  Minehead,  at  Aberthaw.     The  word  Aber,  in  Welsh,  means  the  confluence  of  a 
river,  and  all  places  in  Wales  with  this  addition  have  the  same  signification  as  Exmouth, 
Plymouth,  and  others  in  England.     The  stream  which  meets  the  sea  at  Aberthaw  is  very 
small,  and  so  lazy  in  its  current  that  it  has  not  scooped  out  a  channel,  but  forms  a  swamp, 
Avhich  received  us  from  our  boat  up  to  the  knees.     A  quarter  of  a  mile  inland  is  the  vil- 
lage of  Aberthaw,  where  we  were  welcomed  by  the  custom-house  officer,  the  only  person 
in  the  place  who  could  speak  to  us  in  our  own  language.     With  all  our  home  feelings  fresh 
about  us,  and  not  at  all  corned  by  the  sea  air  during  a  passage  of  three  hours,  it  seemed 
quite  strange  to  be  asked  if  AVC  had  arrived  from  England,  and  to  see  English  faces  about 
us  with  foreign  tongues.     Our  friend  of  the  excise  communicated  to  us  the  history  of  his 
neighbourhood,  which  combines  few  particulars  that  are  generally  known,  or  indeed  worthy 
to  be  so.     The  coast  about  Aberthaw  is  composed  of  a  peculiar  kind  of  limestone,  which 
furnishes  a  most  valuable  cement.      When  burnt  into  lime  and  placed  under  water  it  im- 
mediately assumes  the  hardness  of  the  original  rock,  and  even  when  pulverised  and  scat- 
tered over  the  land  it  is  converted  into  a  hard  grit  by  the  first  shower  of  rain.     In  the  con- 
struction of  bridges,  piers,  and  all  stone  work  that  is  exposed  to  water,  this  lime  is  in  the 
highest  estimation.     The  greater  part  of  the  coast  of  Wales  is  composed  of  limestone,  but 
none  is  found  of  this  peculiar  quality  but  at  Aberthaw.     All  the  roofs  and  wails  in  the 
village  are  defended  by  a  coat  of  this  eternal  cement ;  and  when  a  rool  acumts  me  rain,  it 
is  conceived  quite  time  to  pull  the  house  down. 

We 


58  VOYAGE    ROUXD    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

We  proceeded  from  hence  by  the  direct  and  inland  road  to  Cardiff.  This  town  is  si- 
tuated on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river  Taff,  over  which  there  is  a  handsome  stone  bridge 
of  five  arches,  forming  the  western  entrance.  It  is  the  capital  of  Glamorganshire,  though 
not  the  most  considerable  town  in  the  county,  either  in  extent  or  population.  In  the  ar- 
rangement of  the  streets,  and  the  construction  of  the  buildings,  regularity  is  the  least  striking 
feature,  but  the  streets  are  well  paved,  and  the  houses  of  that  simple  and  elementary 
order,  where  nothing  is  added  that  is  not  wanted,  and  all  that  is  wanted  is  to  keep  out 
wind  and  water.  The  chief  ornament  of  the  town  is  its  castle.  The  whole  of  Glamor- 
ganshire is  rich  in  the  remains  of  castles,  many  of  which  were  founded  about  the  same 
period  by  a  party  of  Norman  usurpers.  In  the  year  1091,  Robert  Fitzhamon,  a  Norman 
chief,  and  kinsman  to  William  the  Conqueror,  made  the  conquest  of  this  county,  and  hav- 
ing parcelled  out  various  lordships  to  twelve  knights  who  had  assisted  him  in  his  enter- 
prize,  reserved  the  toAvn  of  Cardiff  among  other  estates  for  himself,  and  erected  the  castle 
in  the  year  1110.  In  its  present  condition  there  is  nothing  very  interesting  about  it,  and 
the  lovers  of  antiquity  gaze  at  it  and  groan  twice,  once  for  its  ruins  and  once  for  its  im- 
provements. The  great  body  of  the  edifice  has  been  modernised  into  a  comfortable  dwell- 
ing-house by  a  variety  of  alterations  and  embellishments,  which  do  not  exactly  correspond 
with  the  baronial  grandeur  of  its  ancient  parts.  It  may  be  said,  however,  in  palliation  of 
these  innovations,  that  they  certainly  contribute  to  the  convenience  of  the  place  as  a  house 
to  live  in,  and  that  the  newfangled  Avindows  do  admit  the  light,  an  advantage  not  studi- 
ously attended  to  in  those  which  preceded  them.  To  keep  up  ruins  in  a  state  of  purity 
at  an  expense  sufficient  to  build  a  palace  is  an  unprofitable  kind  of  business,  and  Avhen  a 
man  undertakes  by  a  series  of  repairs  to  convert  a  dilapidated  castle  into  a  habitable  dAvell- 
ing,  it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  he  should  sacrifice  all  accommodation,  in  every  corner 
of  every  room  of  his  house,  to  the  harsh  requisitions  of  the  original  design.  When  ancient 
buildings  are  restored  that  they  may  be  devoted  to  the  uses  of  the  first  foundation,  or  pre- 
served as  models  of  particular  orders  of  architecture,  precedent  should  be  observed  in  every 
stone  that  is  replaced  ;  but  no  one  would  Avish  that  all  the  castles  in  Wales  should  be  re- 
paired as  castles,  and  he  who  by  a  feAv  modern  additions  turns  them  to  account,  is  not 
more  criminal  than  he  who  suffers  them  quietly  to  moulder  aAvay.  I  have  said  thus  much 
on  this  subject,  because  it  has  been  the  fashion  for  every  passing  tourist  that  has  glanced 
at  Cardiff  castle,  to  reproach  its  OAvner*  Avith  great  bitterness  of  expression  for  improve- 
ments Avhich  I  think  perfectly  innocent. 

The  castle  and  all  its  offices  are  encompassed  by  a  Avail,  enclosing  a  considerable  area. 
In  the  centre,  on  the  summit  of  an  artificial  mound,  stand  the  unadulterated  remains  of 
the  ancient  keep,  noAv  called  the  magazine,  from  having  been  employed  as  one  in  the  civil 
wars,  Avhen  Cardiff  supported  the  cause  of  Charles  the  First.  The  castle  was  bombarded 
by  CromAvell  in  person  for  three  successive  days,  and  was  finally  reduced  through  the  trea- 

*  The  Marquis  of  Bute. 

chery 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GUEAT    BRITAIN.  59 

che/y  of  a  deserter.  In  a  building  at  the  entrance,  called  the  Black  Tower,  Robert,  Duke  of 
Normandy,  is  said  to  have  been  confined  for  twenty-six  years  by  his  brother,  King  Henry 
the  First.  A  small  dark  hole  under  ground  is  still  to  be  seen,  which  tradition  assigns  as 
the  dungeon  of  the  unfortunate  Robert,  but  if  the  authority  of  some  of  our  early  historians 
did  not  discountenance  the  fact,  the  internal  evidence  of  the  hole  would  be  sufficient  to 
refute  it,  for  nothing  but  a  toad  could  possibly  have  lived  there  for  a  month.  William  of 
Malmesbury  records,  that  Henry  made  the  imprisonment  of  his  brother  very  easy  to  him, 
furnishing  him  with  an  elegant  table,  and  with  an  allowance  of  buffoons  for  his  diver- 
sion, pleasures  which,  in  the  opinion  of  the  duke,  quite  overbalanced  the  loss  of  his 
sovereignty. 

The  only  other  building  in  the  town  at  all  worthy  of  notice  is  the  church,  which  has 
a  high  tower  of  very  peculiar  beauty,  with  the  parapet  richly  carved  and  crowned  at  each 
corner  by  a  transparent  gothic  pinnacle.  The  body  of  the  church  is  of  a  much  older  date, 
and  in  the  most  cumbrous  style  of  Norman  architecture.  The  trade  of  Cardiff  is  trifling, 
but  its  port  is  employed  as  the  outlet  for  the  vast  produce  of  the  iron  mines  in  the  north- 
ern part  of  Glamorganshire.  Two  miles  below  the  town  there  is  an  excellent  harbour, 
Penarth  harbour,  formed  by  the  confluence  of  the  rivers  Ely  and  Taff  and  the  sea.  Ex- 
cepting Milford  Haven,  this  is  the  best  harbour  on  either  side  of  the  Bristol  Channel, 
having  water  enough  at  neap  tides  for  ships  of  six  hundred  tons,  and  room  enough 
for  a  fleet  of  many  hundred  vessels  to  ride  in  perfect  security.  The  bottom  is  of  soft  mud, 
and  entirely  free  from  banks  and  rocks.  From  the  harbour  there  is  a  canal  which  extends 
to  the  iron  works  at  Merthyr  Tydvil.  It  has  a  tide-lock  at  its  mouth,  and  is  navigable 
up  to  Cardiff  for  vessels  of  four  hundred  tons,  and  from  thence  to  Merthyr  Tydvil,  for 
barges  of  one  hundred  tons.  Its  Avhole  length  is  only  twenty-six  miles,  but  the  country 
over  which  it  is  carried  is  in  parts  so  exceedingly  rugged,  that  it  was  a  work  of  enormous 
difficulty  and  expense.  The  head  of  the  canal  at  Merthyr  Tydvil  is  more  than  five  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet  higher  than  the  tide-lock  where  it  falls  into  Penarth  harbour,  and  in 
the  intervening  space  it  is  raised  sometimes  to  an  elevation  of  three  hundred  feet  above 
the  Taff,  to  which  it  runs  parallel  in  its  whole  course. 

The  iron  works  at  Merthyr  Tydvil  are  said  to  be  by  far  the  most  extensive  of  any  in 
the  kingdom.  Before  the  war  with  America,  which  has  made  some  reduction  in  the 
business,  Mr.  Crawshay,  the  proprietor  of  Cyfarthfa  works,  the  largest  in  Merthyr  Tydvil, 
constantly  employed  fifteen  hundred  men,  at  an  average  of  thirty  shillings  a  week  per 
man,  making  the  amount  of  weekly  wages  paid  by  him,  two  thousand  two  hundred  and 
fifty  pounds.  It  appeared  from  the  canal  accounts,  that  the  Cyfarthfa  works  sent  nine 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  six  tons  of  iron  to  Cardiff  in  one  year  *.  The  whole  quantity 
of  wrought  iron  formerly  shipped  at  Cardiff  amounted  on  an  average  to  about  five  hun- 


*  See  Malkin's  Scenery,  Sic.  of  South  Wales. 

I  dred 


60  VOYAGK    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

dred  tons  weekly,  and  the  exportation  is  still  immense,  to  London,  Bristol,  Portsmouth, 
Plymouth,  and  other  ports  of  England. 

The  natural  scenery  round  Cardiff  presents  few  objects  to  attract  attention.  Between 
the  town  and  the  sea  the  country  is  extended  in  a  flat,  dingy  moor,  through  which  the 
Taff  meanders  in  a  stream  of  mud,  and  of  a  hue,  not  as  Dray  ton  represented  it  in  his  time, 

" as  gray  as  any  glass," 


but  as  black  as  any  coal.  To  the  northward  of  Cardiff  this  river  is  said  to  run  through  a 
most  delightful  country,  rich  in  cultivation,  and  abounding  in  scenes  of  picturesque 
beauty  that  are  not  surpassed  by  any  part  of  South  Wales. 

In  the  narrow  strait  of  the  Bristol  Channel,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Severn  to  Swan- 
sea Bay,  the  Welsh  coast  is  tame  and  uninteresting,  extended  cither  in  a  long  flat  of  sand, 
or  in  low  banks  of  limestone,  which,  from  the,  uniform  and  precise  arrangement  of  the 
strata,  have  frequently  the  appearance  of  an  artificial  wall.     It  is  a  most  dangerous  coast 
for  shipping,  with  very  shoal  water  along  shore,  and  beset  with  sunk  rocks  and  long  banks 
stretching  far  into  the  sea.     About  four  miles  from  Penarth  is  the  island  of  Scilly,  and 
two  miles  further  to  the  westward  the  island  of  Barry,  both  of  which  were  in  all  probabi- 
lity once  attached  to  the  mainland.     They  are  both  distant  about  three  hundred  yards 
from  high-water  mark,  but  at  low  water  they  arc  approachable  by  land,  and  a  carriage 
may  pass  to  Barry,  though  the  road  is  over  a  very  rough  bank  of  stones.    Scilly  Isle  is  so 
called  from  Reginald  Scilly,  one  of  the  twelve  knights  who  assisted  Fitzhamon  in  the 
conquest  of  Glamorgan,  and  Avho  received  this  island  as  part  of  his  allotment:  it  is  not 
quite  a  mile  in  circumference,  and  is  neither  inhabited  nor  cultivated.     Barry  Isle  derives 
its  name  from  an  Irish  saint,  Baruch,  who,  like  some  other  holy  men  of  that  country 
whom  I  have  had  occasion  to  mention,  though  not  positively  of  an  amphibious  nature, 
had  some  piscatorial  privileges  that  are  not  the  common  lot  of  land  animals.    Being  on  a 
visit  at  the  palace  of  the  Archbishop  St.  David,  in  Pembrokeshire,  he  was  detained 
there  so  long  by  contrary  winds,  that  he  at  length  grew  quite  impatient,  and  borrowing  a 
poney  from  his  illustrious  host,  whipped  and  spurred  his  way  over  to  Ireland,  plump  in 
the  wind's  eye,  but  in  how  long  a  period  of  time  is  not  recorded.     He  spent  part  of  his 
life  in  the  character  of  a  hermit  in  Barry  Isle,  and  died  and  was  buried  there  in  the  year 
700.     This  island  contains  three  hundred  acres  of  land,  part  of  which  is  in  a  state  of  cul- 
tivation, and  maintains  a  few  cows  and  sheep.     There  is  only  one  building  on  it,  which 
in  the  summer  season  is  fitted  up  as  a  boarding  house,  and  has  accommodations  for  ten 
or  twelve  people.     The  place  is  inconvenient  for  the  purpose  of  bathing,  has  no  beautiful 
walks  about  it,  and  none  of  the  usual  amusements  of  watering  places,  but  visitors  are 
attracted  to  it  by  the  novelty  of  the  situation,  and  that  they  may  gaze  at  the  sea  all 
round  them,  and  wonder  at  their  confinement.     Any  neglect  or  miscalculation  in  the 
purveyors  of  bread,  beef,  and  other  provisions,  might  at  any  time  involve  the  company  in 

some 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  6l 

some  embarrassment,  but  then  there  is  something  delightfully  piquant  in  procuring  the  ne- 
cessaries of  life,  as  it  were,  by  stratagem,  or  by  chance,  and  which  can  be  duly  appreciated 
only  by  those  who  have  been  long  worn  out  by  the  repetition  of  breakfast,  dinner,  and 
supper,  in  their  ordinary  course  of  dull  and  certain  rotation.  The  place  would  form  a 
most  excellent  hospital  for  ennui,  and  he  that  is  feeding  in  the  wide  world  under  the 
weight  of  that  distemper,  might  to  a  certainty  become  lean  and  lively  by  a  summer's  exile 
at  Barry. 

A  little  higher  up  the  channel  are  the  Flatholm  and  Steepholm,  two  islands,  which, 
together  with  the  numerous  shoals  and  sandbanks  stretching  out  from  the  Welsh  and  En- 
glish coasts,  form  a  line  of  obstructions  before  the  mouth  of  the  Severn,  which  renders  its 
navigation  exceedingly  difficult.  The  Flatholm  is  four  miles  from  the  Welsh,  and  eight 
miles  from  the  English  coast:  the  Steepholm  is  opposite  to  it,  and  three  miles  nearer  to 
the  English  coast.  The  Flatholm  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  circumference,  and  low 
land,  as  its  name  imports.  Upon  it  there  is  a  lighthouse,  a  large  circular  building  of 
stone,  seventy-two  feet  in  height,  wliich  was  erected  under  the  authority  of  the  Corpora- 
tion of  Trinity  House,  in  the  year  1734.  It  may  be  seen  from  Bristol,  and  likewise 
from  a  great  distance  down  the  channel,  and  thus  acts  as  a  guide  to  vessels  through  all  the 
intricacies  of  this  dangerous  track.  The  island  has  not  more  than  forty  acres  of  land  in 
a  state  of  cultivation,  and  is  inhabited  only  by  persons  who  have  the  charge  of  the  light- 
house. The  Steepholm  is  a  round,  lofty  island,  rather  less  in  circumference  than  the 
other,  perfectly  barren  and  not  inhabited. 

For  some  leagues  to  the  westward  of  Barry,  there  is  nothing  worth  observing  imme- 
diately on  the  coast,  but  we  had  occasional  views  of  the  inland  country,  which  is  rich  in 
scenes  of  picturesque  beauty,  generally  well  wooded,  and  in  all  respects  well  cultivated. 
The  fertility  and  verdure  of  the  land  do  not  appear  to  be  in  any  degree  injured  by  expo- 
sure to  the  sea-wind;  the  trees  and  pasturage  are  neither  stunted  nor  discoloured,  and  the 
hedges  and  ditches,  and  other  privileged  nurseries  of  spontaneous  vegetation,  are  not  de- 
spoiled of  their  proper  ornaments  of  briers,  and  weeds,  and  flowers.  I  make  particular 
mention  of  the  hedge  rows,  not  only  because  they  contribute  to  the  embellishment  of  the 
country,  but  because  they  furnish  the  comfort  of  shade,  a  rare  enjoyment  on  the  coast, 
where  there  is  generally  no  possibility  of  getting  out  of  the  sun  but  by  getting  under  the 
water.  In  maritime  counties  which  are  open  to  the  wind  blowing  over  a  wide  extent  of 
sea,  briers  and  weeds  arc  as  coy  as  more  important  kinds  of  vegetation,  and  the  hedges 
by  consequence  appear  in  the  form  of  stone  walls,  or  bare  banks  of  earth,  cutting  the 
brown  fields  into  regular  oblongs  and  squares,  and  most  obtrusively  announcing  their 
office  to  the  eye,  but  affording  neither  shelter  nor  shade  to  man  or  beast. 

The  next  memorable  object  on  the  coast  is  St.  Donat's  Castle,  a  structure  of  no  par- 
ticular beauty  or  grandeur,  but  which  one  approaches  with  interest  and  curiosity,  merely 
that  he  may  pore  over  stones  and  mortar  laid  together  by  human  hands  seven  hundred 

years 


6'2  VOYAGE    HOUND    GHEAT    BRITAIN. 

years  ago.  It  was  built  about  the  same  time  Avith  Cardiff  Castle,  and  its  first  lord  was 
William  de  Esterling  or  Stradling,  one  of  the  followers  of  Fitzhamon.  The  family  of  the 
Stradlings  outlived  the  descendants  of  all  the  other  twelve  knights,  and  had  possession  of 
the  lordship  and  castle  of  St.  Donats  for  six  hundred  and  eighty -four  years.  The  building- 
is  situated  on  a  gentle  eminence,  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  sea,  and  had  in  its  better 
days  a  small  park  to  the  west,  stocked  with  deer,  and  a  succession  of  formal  gardens  on 
its  south  side,  descending  in  terraces  from  the  walls  to  the  beach.  These  ornamental 
additions  appear  to  have  been  long  neglected,  and  are  now  scarcely  distinguishable  under 
the  various  disguises  with  which  cows,  sheep,  and  pigs,  have  united  to  encumber  them. 
But  the  domains  in  their  present  condition  are  much  more  in  harmony  with  the  venerable 
exterior  of  the  castle,  than  when  frittered  into  lawns  and  tulip  beds :  a  certain  degree  of 
ruin  is  essential  to  the  interest  of  an  ancient  castle,  especially  of  one  that  has  no  interest 
but  its  antiquity,  and  St.  Donats  is  now  exactly  in  that  state  of  doubtful  preservation 
which  throws  over  it  a  mournful  solemnity ;  with  every  object  that  the  eye  rests  upon 
stained  with  the  rust  of  age,  a  memorial  of  time,  and  a  subject  for  seriousness  and 
reflection. 

The  castle  is  closely  surrounded  by  trees,  and  except  from  the  high  ground  in  the 
park,  no  considerable  part  of  the  building  can  be  seen  distinctly  in  one  view.  Between 
the  eminence  on  which  it  stands  and  the  park,  there  is  a  little  dell  thickly  planted  with 
elms,  which  if  not  coeval  with  the  castle,  accord  with  it  in  appearances  of  antiquity,  and 
tell  of  winters  that  have  passed,  by  the  gray,  withered,  rigid  branches  at  their  tops,  rising 
above  the  waving  foliage  below.  In  the  dell,  immediately  under  the  castle,  is  a  small 
church,  which,  like  every  object  in  the  scene  about  it,  exhibits  many  signs  of  age  and 
decay.  There  are  a  few  old  monuments  in  it,  representing  human  figures  that  are  no 
longer  to  be  identified  by  the  noses,  the  fingers,  or  the  toes.  There  is  a  statue  of  Prince 
Richard  Hopkins  with  the  head  broken  off,  and  one  of  Howel  Dha,  of  which  the  parts 
that  arc  wanting  are  more  numerous  than  those  which  remain. 

On  the  eastern  side  the  castle,  was  defended  by  a  wall,  fragments  of  which  are  still 
visible  through  a  thick  covering  of  ivy  and  moss;  within  the  Avail  are  some  ruins  of  out- 
buildings, of  Avhich  no  one  in  the  neighbourhood  has  presumed  positively  to  define  the 
use,  but  groans  have  been  heard,  and  surmise  has  made  up  a  story,  not  of  many  Avords, 
but  an  ocean  of  blood.  On  a  height  in  the  park  there  is  a  Avatch-toAver,  to  Avhich  tradi- 
tion attaches  a  story  of  as  much  cruelty  and  oppression  as  that  which  groans  out  its 
horrors  among  the  opposite  ruins.  It  reports,  that  in  the  days  when  lords  of  castles  Avere 
the  legal  tyrants  of  the  country  around  them,  a  centinel  Avas  ahvays  stationed  on  this 
watch-tOAver  to  look  out  for  vessels  in  distress,  not  for  the  purpose  of  guiding  and  saving 
them,  but  that  the  servants  of  the  castle  might  have  instant  notice  Avhen  a  ship  Avas 
Avrecked,  and  pounce  upon  it  in  the  name  of  their  lord,  before  the  country  people  had 
time  to  come  doAvn  and  intercept  them.  Those  Avho  were  excluded  from  any  share  in  the 

plunder, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  CHEAT  BRITAIN.  63 

plunder,  would  no  doubt  feel  infinitely  exasperated  at  this  inhuman  selfishness,  and  would 
regard  all  encroachments  on  the  common  right  in  wrecks,  as  an  intolerable  injustice ; 
perhaps  as  much  so  as  an  embargo  on  the  natural  produce  of  the  sea,  the  sprats  or  the 
herrings.  But  as  pillage  in  some  form  was  a  matter  of  necessity,  it  was  certainly  more 
desirable  for  those  suffering  shipwreck,  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  one  claimant,  than  exposed 
to  the  tumultuous  violence  of  a  general  scramble. 

The  channel  here  is  so  obstructed  by  shoals  and  sunk  rocks,  that  wrecks  are  very 
frequent ;  and  the  people  on  this  coast  have  always  been,  and  still  are,  notorious  for  more 
than  common  rapaciousness  and  brutality  in  their  attacks  upon  the  miserable  wretches 
who  have  the  misfortune  to  be  cast  away  upon  their  shores.  The  particulars  that  are 
recorded  of  their  savageness  on  these  occasions,  are  such  as  one  should  expect  to  hear  of 
only  amidst  the  privileged  pillage  and  massacre  in  a  stormed  town :  they  have  been 
accused  not  only  of  robbing,  but  sometimes  of  murdering,  that  they  might  rob  with 
security ;  and,  heedless  of  age  and  sex,  of  tearing  the  clothes  from  the  persons  of  women 
and  children,  though  drenched  with  wet,  and  shivering  and  dying  with  cold.  There  is  a 
mixture  of  such  monstrous  cruelty  and  cowardice  in  thus  falling  upon  the  feeble  and 
distressed,  that  it  is  difficult  to  credit  these  shocking  accounts,  but  I  fear  that  they  are 
true,  and  that  they  extend  to  many  other  parts  of  our  coast.  I  do  not  believe  that  the 
seamen  along  shore  are  ever  concerned  in  any  of  these  desperate  outrages :  I  have  before 
had  occasion  to  observe,  that  they  do  not  hesitate  to  plunder  a  wreck,  and  that  they 
plunder  on  a  simple  principle  of  justice  to  themselves ;  but  they  are  invariably  humane 
and  gentle  towards  the  sufferers,  and  I  have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  seeing  them 
when  they  have  readily  risked  their  own  lives  to  save  others;  and  that,  too,  when  they  had 
no  expectation  of  reward.  The  people  who  are  called  wreckers  come  from  all  the 
country  villages  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  coast;  and  it  is  most  probable  that  the 
numbers  of  those  are  but  few,  who  are  guilty  of  the  worst  enormities  of  their  dreadful 
trade,  and  that  they  consist  of  those  miscreants  who,  not  only  on  the  coast  but  in  all  parts 
of  this  and  every  other  country,  prowl  about  loose  in  society,  always  prepared  for  plunder, 
and  often  fearless  and  ferocious  from  want,  ready  to  murder  when  plunder  is  to  be  the 
reward.  From  my  own  observation  of  the  general  manners  and  disposition  of  the  people 
on  the  coasts  of  Cornwall,  Devonshire,  and  South  Wales,  where  cruelties  on  occasions  of 
shipwreck  are  most  notorious,  I  can  certainly  say  nothing  to  the  discredit  of  their 
humanity ;  but  I  am  aware  that  a  man  may  be  easily  deceived  in  his  estimate  of  the 
character  of  the  common  people,  who  pays  his  way  through  a  country  during  a  summer's 
ramble,  and  that  he  must  not  put  all  his  purchases  in  the  articles  of  bows  and  smiles,  to 
the  account  of  pure  benevolence. 

But  to  return  to  St.  Donats.  Those  who  desire  to  depart  from  the  castle  in  the  full 
possession  of  those  grave  and  sober  feelings  which  the  contemplation  of  antiquity 
inspires,  should  view  only  its  exterior,  and  not  advance  beyond  the  shade  of  the  venerable 

elms 


64  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

elms  which  surround  it.  When  we  entered  the  inner  court  of  the  building,  all  the  visions 
of  days  that  are  gone  vanished  at  once,  and  we  stood  amidst  the  familiar  bustle  of  life  as 
it  is,  encompassed  on  all  sides  by  the  dangling  signals  of  the  great  wash.  The  interior  of 
the  castle  is  in  tolerable  repair,  and  is  divided  into  separate  tenements,  all  of  which  are 
inhabited.  There  is  nothing  particularly  deserving  of  notice  in  any  of  the  apartments : 
they  have  all  been  materially  altered  in  form  since  their  first  foundation,  and  in  point  of 
furniture,  exhibit  nothing  but  the  plainest  specimens  of  modern  upholstery.  All  the  super- 
stitions of  the  place  are  nearly  superseded,  for  every  corner  that  could  have  harboured 
a  spirit  is  turned  to  some  vulgar  use.  The  last  subterranean  ghost  was  vanquished  by  a 
hogshead  of  ale ;  and  some  mysterious  music  in  an  upper  chamber,  quite  silenced  by  the 
removal  of  an  old  trunk,  and  the  substitution  of  tables  and  chairs. 

The  coast  at  St.  Donats  is  low  and  tame,  but  about  a  league  farther  to  the  Avestward 
it  assumes  a  bolder  character,  and  continues  for  a  few  miles  in  a  range  of  cliffs,  perhaps 
not  exceeding  eighty  feet  in  height,  but  remarkable  for  some  curious  excavations  formed 
by  the  action  of  the  sea,  in  some  of  which  the  rocks  are  fretted  into  a.  most  perplexing 
variety  of  fantastic  configurations,  and  in  others  disposed  into  such  formal  combinations, 
with  such  a  singular  correspondence  of  parts,  that  they  look  more  like  the  work  of  art  than 
things  of  nature.  Two  of  the  most  extraordinary  caverns  are  distinguished  by  the  names 
of  the  Cave  and  the  Wind  Hole.  The  Cave  is  a  long  passage  running  parallel  to  the 
shore,  with  an  arched  roof  supported  by  columns  of  rock,  and  has  the  appearance  of  a 
magnificent  piazza.  The  entrance  from  the  south  is  very  grand,  and  there  is  an  awful 
gloom  and  stillness  within,  which  we  thought  very  impressive,  but  which  our  guide  soon 
interrupted  with  all  the  force  of  his  lungs,  in  order  to  explain  to  us  how  distinctly  we 
might  hear  his  voice  in  the  grotto  ;  nor  could  we  convince  him  during  the  whole  period  of 
our  stay,  that  any  thing  but  a  little  delicacy  on  our  part  on  the  subject  of  troubling  him, 
could  move  us  to  pray  for  a  remission  of  his  thunder. 

The  Wind  Hole  is  a  much  larger  excavation,  extending  at  right  angles  to  the  shore, 
and  has  obtained  its  name  from  some  fissures  which  descend  from  the  top  of  the  cliff,  at 
some  distance  from  its  edge,  and  open  into  the  cavern  below :  when  there  is  a  fresh  wind 
blowing  on  to  the  shore,  it  rushes  up  these  vents  with  great  violence.  The  state  of  the 
tide  did  not  permit  us  to  explore  the  interior  of  this  cavern,  Avhich  can  be  entered  only  at 
low  water  during  spring  tides. 

On  the  summit  of  a  projecting  cliff,  about  four  miles  from  St.  Donats,  is  a  gentle- 
man's seat,  called  Dunraven  House,  a  modern  structure,  but  occupying  the  place  of  an 
ancient  castle  which,  after  having  undergone  in  the  contests  of  the  Saxons  and  the 
Welsh,  the  usual  vicissitudes  of  castles,  devolved  to  along  succession  of  peaceable  proprie- 
tors, of  the  name  of  Butler,  till  it  passed  by  marriage  to  a  family  of  Vaughans.  The  last 
proprietor  of  this  name  is  said  to  have  grown  rich  by  the  wrecks  on  his  manor,  which  he 
multiplied  as  much  as  possible  by  the  hellish  device  of  setting  up  false  lights  along  the 

shore. 


St.  Donats,  Glamorganshire 


Britton  Ferry,  Glamorganshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  6'5 

shore.  Tradition  reports  that  this  wretch  was  punished  for  his  iniquity  by  a  sudden  mis- 
fortune, of  which  these  are  the  particulars.  Within  sight  of  the  house  there  is  a  large 
rock,  which  is  partially  dry  at  low  water,  but  at  other  times  entirely  covered  by  the  sea. 
On  this  rock  two  of  Vaughan's  sons  landed  one  day  for  the  sake  of  amusement,  but  not 
taking  care  to  secure  their  boat,  it  was  carried  away  by  the  tide,  and  they  suddenly 
discovered  themselves  doomed  to  inevitable  destruction,  and  with  the  protracted  horror 
of  watching  the  gradual  rise  of  the  water,  which  they  knew  must  at  last  overwhelm  them. 
In  this  terrible  situation  they  were  perceived  by  the  family  from  the  house,  but  no 
assistance  could  be  given  to  them,  for  there  was  no  other  boat  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  no 
time  to  procure  one  from  a  distance :  amidst  the  vain  expedients  and  frantic  screams  of 
the  poor  boys  and  their  wretched  parents,  the  tide  rose,  and  the  rock  disappeared.  This 
visitation  was,  of  course,  generally  regarded  as  a  judgment  on  Vaughan ;  and  he  himself 
was  so  struck  with  grief  and  remorse,  that  he  could  no  longer  endure  the  sight  of  his  house, 
and  sold  it  to  a  Mr.  Wyndham,  the  ancestor  of  its  present  possessor. 

The  mansion  has  lately  received  many  improvements,  and  is  said  to  be  one  of  the 
best  houses  in  the  county.  The  grounds  about  it,  in  consequence  of  their  elevated  situa- 
tion, are  naked  and  cheerless,  but  they  command  a  most  delightful  view  over  the  Bristol 
Channel,  bounded  by  the  cliffs  of  Somerset  and  Devon.  These  cliffs  lose  little  of  their 
vastness  when  seen  from  this  distance  of  four  or  five  leagues,  but  seem  still  near  to  the 
eye,  and  are  objects  of  involuntary  attention.  We  had  had  them  in  view  during  our  whole 
progress  along  this  side  of  the  channel,  and  were  pleased  to  contemplate  them  again  and 
again  under  all  their  effects ;  either  when  towering  through  the  mists  of  morning,  or  with 
all  their  variations  of  form  and  colour  made  distinct  by  the  brilliancy  of  noon,  or  when 
sobered  into  one  dark,  solemn  mass,  by  the  fading  light  of  evening. 

We  pursued  our  course  along  the  coast  for  some  miles  to  the  westward  of  Dunraven; 
but  finding  nothing  to  repay  us  for  our  toil,  and  being  informed  that  we  should  find 
nothing  for  many  miles  farther,  we  turned  inland,  and  arriving  at  the  Pyle  Inn,  a 
solitary  house  established  purposely  for  the  convenience  of  tourists  through  Wales,  pro- 
cured a  chaise  there,  and  proceeded  with  all  speed,  by  the  shortest  route,  to  Briton  Ferry. 
The  turnpike-road  skirts  the  coast  almost  the  whole  way,  and  we  had  therefore  the  plea- 
sure of  ascertaining,  that  we  had  not  been  misinformed,  and  that  there  was  really  nothing  to 
see,  except  a  long  tract  of  sand.  This  observation  refers  merely  to  the  coast;  the  inland 
country  still  continued  to  be  verdant  and  beautiful.  Between  the  Pyle  Inn  and  Briton 
Ferry,  a  distance  of  ten  miles,  many  small  streams  meet  the  sea ;  and  these,  together  with 
the  larger  river  of  Neath,  have  formed  the  vast  accumulation  of  sand,  which  not  only  lines 
the  shore,  but  extends  in  "dangerous  banks  far  into  the  channel. 

Briton  Ferry  forms  a  little  haven  at  the  mouth  of  the  Neath,  in  the  deepest  recess  of 
Swansea  Bay,  and  is  surrounded  by  scenery,  which  in  richness  and  elegance  I  have  seldom 

seen 


66  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

seen  equalled  on  any  other  part  of  our  coast.  The  river  spreads  at  its  confluence  into  a 
fine  expanse  of  water,  deep,  smooth,  and  clear,  and  is  bounded  on  each  side  by  gentle  hills, 
beautifully  diversified  in  form,  and  covered  with  trees  of  full  and  stately  growth.  The  haven 
is  always  crowded  with  vessels,  that  add  materially  to  the  general  picturesque  effect :  every 
tide  puts  them  in  motion,  when  they  are  seen  gliding  swiftly  and  silently  through  the 
glassy  water,  their  sails  hanging  idle  and  in  folds,  till  entering  the  sea  they  catch  the 
breeze  and  bound  away.  I  would  willingly  dwell  longer  on  this  beautiful  scene,  but  that 
it  is  impossible  to  give  any  adequate  idea  of  it  by  description :  it  presents  no  one  simple 
and  prominent  subject  for  observation,  but  is  composed  of  an  infinity  of  parts,  all  of  great 
importance  in  the  picture,  but  connected  by  so  many  slight  relations,  and  relieved  and 
enforced  by  so  many  gradations  of  distance  and  contrast,  that  they  cannot  be  combined 
with  effect  in  language.  Lord  Vernon  is  the  proprietor  of  Briton  Ferry,  and  has  a  house 
in  the  neighbourhood,  which  commands  almost  every  variety  of  prospect  that  can  be 
pleasing ;  the  winding  river,  the  broad  sea,  and  a  succession  of  hills  and  valleys  in  the 
happiest  style  of  nature,  and  in  the  richest  state  of  cultivation. 

Near  the  house  is  a  village  church,  with  a  small  burial-ground,  in  which  the  graves 
are  all  studiously  decked  with  evergreens  and  flowers.  This  is  a  custom  peculiar  to  many 
parts  of  Wales ;  but  the  churchyard  of  Briton  Ferry  has  long  been  noted  for  more  than 
common  profusion  in  its  decorations,  and  has  been  celebrated  in  an  elegy  by  Mason. 
There  is  something  at  once  pretty  and  tender  in  this  custom,  but,  like  all  human  institu- 
tions, it  is  subject  to  abuse,  and  is  sometimes,  with  a  strange  perversion  of  its  proper 
signification,  converted  into  an  instrument  of  malice  and  revenge.  None  but  sweet- 
scented  flowers  are  planted  on  the  graves,  and  no  others  are  considered  as  emblematical 
of  goodness ;  but  the  turnsole,  African  marygold,  or  some  other  memorials  of  iniquity, 
are  sometimes  insidiously  introduced  among  the  pinks  and  roses  by  a  piqued  neighbour, 
in  expression  of  contempt  for  the  deceased  or  his  surviving  relations.  The  facility  which 
is  thus  given  to  every  malevolent  individual  of  dropping  a  seed  against  the  memory  of 
another,  is  certainly  a  great  imperfection  in  this  system  of  monumental  gardening;  and  it 
forms  a  puzzling  kind  of  consideration  to  determine  what  possible  construction  the  law 
of  libel  could  put  upon  this  singular  mode  of  slander :  it  would  have  rather  a  droll  effect 
in  a  trial,  to  hear  of  a  man  escaping  on  a  nice  question  of  smell,  or  being  at  once  pro- 
nounced guilty  by  the  whole  nose  of  the  court.  The  custom  is  now  growing  into  disuse, 
having,  it  is  said,  in  a  great  measure  been  eaten  away  by  the  horses  of  the  clergy,  who 
have  enforced  their  right  of  pasturage  in  the  churchyards* ;  and  when  we  advert  to  the 
small  stipends  received  by  many  of  this  body  in  Wales,  we  cannot  in  justice  be  very 
severe  in  our  animadversions  on  these  encroachments. 

*  Se,-  Donovan's  Kxcin-i'.u  through  South  Wales. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  67 

The  port  of  Briton  Ferry  is  frequented  principally  by  vessels  employed  in  the  service 
of  the  copper  works  and  iron  works  of  Neath.  They  bring  copper  ore  from  Cornwall 
and  Anglesea ;  the  iron  ore  and  coals  are  obtained  from  mines  at  a  short  distance  from 
the  works.  The  carriage  of  all  the  materials  from  the  mines  to  the  works,  and  from  the 
works  to  the  harbour,  is  rendered  easy  and  cheap  by  a  canal,  which  commences  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Neath,  and  runs  twelve  miles  up  the  country.  There  is  always  something 
interesting  in  the  busy  bustle  of  industry ;  but  in  copper  works  and  iron  works,  it  certainly 
presents  itself  to  the  eye  under  its  most  unfavourable  appearances.  One  is  more  particu- 
larly disgusted  with  the  soot  and  smoke  of  Neath,  from  seeing  them  so  familiar  with  the 
faces  of  the  women,  who  in  all  parts  of  Wales  are  employed  in  offices  of  the  hardest  and 
dirtiest  drudgery  like  the  men.  On  the  banks  of  the  canal  I  saw  little  companies  of  them 
chipping  the  large  coals  into  small  pieces  for  the  furnaces,  without  shoes  or  stockings, 
their  clothes  hanging  about  them,  released,  for  the  sake  of  ease,  from  pins  and  strings, 
and  their  faces  as  black  as  the  coals,  except  where  channeled  by  the  streams  of  perspira- 
tion that  trickled  down  them.  If  there  had  been  a  Don  Quixote  in  Wales  we  should  most 
assuredly  have  met  him  here.  Nothing  can  be  more  ghastly  than  the  countenances  of 
the  people  employed  in  the  copper  works ;  but  I  was  informed  by  a  gentleman  residing 
near  Neath,  that  their  health  is  not  materially  affected,  or  at  least,  that  they  do  not  suffer 
more  than  those  who  labour  in  the  iron-founderies.  There  were  many  men  among  them 
of  great  age,  who  had  been  surrounded  by  copper  in  all  its  processes  for  thirty  or  forty 
years. 

The  smoke  from  the  copper  works,  if  it  comes  in  contact  with  the  land  before  it  has 
been  at  all  rarefied  by  the  air,  acts  as  a  deadly  blight  upon  all  vegetation.  The  Neath 
works  are  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  an  open  space,  so  that  the  smoke  is  either  dissipated 
by  the  wind,  or  suspended  till  it  loses  its  pernicious  qualities ;  but  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Swansea  there  are  some  very  extensive  copper  works,  which  are  situated  in  a  hollow, 
and  immediately  about  them  there  is  not  a  blade  of  grass,  a  green  bush,  nor  any  form  of 
vegetation  :  volumes  of  smoke,  thick  and  pestilential,  are  seen  crawling  up  the  sides  of  the 
hills,  which  are  as  bare  as  a  turnpike-road. 

From  the  mouth  of  the  river  Neath  the  province  of  Gower  commences,  and  from 
thence  extends  to  the  westward  in  a  narrow  peninsula,  bounded  on  the  south  and  west 
sides  by  the  sea,  and  on  the  north  by  the  estuary  called  the  Burry  River.  This  province 
was  first  conquered  in  the  year  109.9,  by  Henry  Beaumont,  Earl  of  Warwick,  a  Norman 
chief,  who,  unlike  his  countryman  Fitzhamon,  did  not  limit  his  demands  on  the  country 
which  he  had  subdued  to  certain  lordships  in  its  richest  parts  for  himself  and  his  followers, 
but,  in  a  more  comprehensive  spirit  of  usurpation,  seized  upon  all.  Fitzhamon  and  his 
knights  erected  castles  and  military  works,  that  they  might  resist  any  hostile  attacks,  but 
when  once  firmly  established  in  their  possessions,  they  seem  to  have  desisted  from  all 
further  aggressions,  and  not  to  have  interrupted  the  native  inhabitants  in  the  enjoyment 

K  of 


68  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

of  the  common  customs  and  privileges  of  their  country.  But  the  conqueror  Beaumont 
drove  all  the  natives  from  Gower,  and  peopled  it  with  a  colony  of  Normans  and  English, 
which  maintained  its  supremacy  in  this  little  district  of  land  in  spite  of  all  opposition  from 
the  Welsh,  who  regarded  it  for  centuries  with  the  bitterest  animosity.  The  peculiar 
situation  of  this  province,  well  defined  and  defended  by  nature,  and  from  its  extent  of 
coast  possessing  means  of  easy  and  certain  communication  with  England,  pointed  it  out 
as  admirably  calculated  for  the  establishment  of  a  colony,  that  would  at  once  relieve  the 
mother-country  from  some  clamorous  adventurers,  who  were  unprovided  for,  and  act  as  a 
constant  check  upon  the  turbulence  of  the  Welsh.  That  the  Welsh,  during  their  struggles 
for  liberty,  resented  this  tyranny  and  injustice  with  violent  indignation  is  not  to  be 
doubted ;  but  when  they  finally  lost  all  pretensions  to  the  rank  of  an  independent  nation, 
their  jealousies  at  the  intrusion  of  strangers  would  naturally  subside,  and  give  way  to  sober 
calculation  on  the  advantages  of  mutual  and  friendly  communication.  Their  irritation, 
however,  was  very  tardily  appeased,  and  it  is  said,  that  even  to  this  day  their  intercourse 
with  the  people  of  Gower  is  marked  with  evident  coldness  and  suspicion.  But  this  is 
giving  them  credit  for  a  degree  of  folly  and  illiberality  that  does  equal  injustice  to  their 
good  sense  and  good  nature.  It  Avould  indeed  be  quite  unnatural  if,  after  the  tranquillity 
of  ages,  this  unconquerable  alienation  should  still  subsist  between  people  living  under  the 
same  government  and  the  same  laws,  brought  continually  together  by  a  thousand  mutual 
necessities,  drinking  the  same  ale  and  eating  the  same  mutton.  Nevertheless,  some  tra- 
vellers have  declared,  that  all  intercourse  between  the  inhabitants  of  Gower  and  the 
adjoining  parts  of  Wales  is  absolutely  interdicted ;  and  others,  with  a  little  more  modera- 
tion, have  said,  that  they  will  not  intermarry,  that  their  customs  are  totally  distinct,  and 
particularly,  that  they  wear  very  different  kinds  of  hats.  Nothing  to  corroborate  these 
assertions  fell  within  the  scope  of  my  observation ;  on  the  contrary,  I  met  with  frequent 
instances  of  English  husbands  and  Welsh  wives,  and  Welsh  husbands  and  English  wives, 
apparently  living  together  in  perfect  harmony.  In  the  last  boisterous  excesses  of  a  wake 
or  a  fair,  I  can  easily  conceive  that  the  ancient  feelings  of  national  rivalship  might  be  for  a 
moment  revived,  and  that  the  parties  might  be  ready  to  decide  the  question  of  superiority 
at  the  point  of  their  knuckles  ;  but  in  the  ordinary  business  of  life,  they  do  not  suffer  their 
peace  to  be  disturbed  by  such  fanciful  distinctions,  but  associate  on  terms  of  the  most 
intimate  familiarity,  and  interchange  hearts  and  hats  without  reserve. 

The  English  language  is  generally  spoken  throughout  Gower,  and  this  is  now  the  only 
evident  discordance  between  the  two  people  (I  mean  between  the  people  of  Gower  and 
other  parts  of  Wales,  for  they  are  both  distinguished  by  many  light  peculiarities  from  the 
people  of  England)  and  as  the  English  language  has  long  been  rapidly  spreading  over  all 
Wales,  it  is  probable  that  in  the  course  of  half  a  century  even  this  may  be  removed.  An 
English  tourist  in  Wales  who  Avishes  to  give  zest  to  his  travels  by  reckoning  an  inter- 
preter in  his  suite,  must  avoid  the  trodden  paths,  for,  except  among  the  mountains  and 

the 


VOYAGE    HOUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  69 

the  remote  villages,  it  is  now  a  kind  of  rarity  to  meet  with  one  who  can  converse  only  in 
Welsh. 

We  proceeded  in  a  boat  from  Briton  Ferry  to  Swansea,  a  gay  and  flourishing  town, 
all  alive  with  the  activity  of  business.  It  is  the  most  considerable  sea-port  in  Wales,  and 
employs  a  great  number  of  shipping,  but  has  no  foreign  commerce.  Coals  and  copper 
form  the  most  important  articles  of  its  merchandise :  it  supplies  Cornwall  exclusively 
with  coals,  and  receives  from  thence  copper  ore,  which  is  smelted  in  the  works  near 
Swansea,  and  again  exported  to  London,  Birmingham,  and  other  parts  of  England. 
Two-thirds  of  all  the  copper  in  the  kingdom  are  said  to  be  smelted  here.  One  ton  of 
copper  requires  twenty  tons  of  coals  to  smelt  it,  so  that  in  the  account  of  carriage,  it  is 
cheaper  by  nineteen- twentieths  to  bring  the  copper  to  the  coal,  than  to  take  the  coal  to 
the  copper. 

The  harbour  of  Swansea  is  formed  by  two  stone  piers  extending  more  than  three 
hundred  yards  into  the  sea,  and  leaving  a  space  of  seventy-five  yards  between  them  for 
the  entrance.  The  unusual  length  of  these  piers  was  rendered  necessary  in  order  to 
increase  the  depth  of  water  on  the  bar,  occasioned  by  the  sand  and  mud  brought  down 
by  the  river  Tawe,  which  opens  into  the  harbour.  The  river  is  extremely  narrow,  and  is 
navigable  only  for  two  miles  from  its  mouth ;  but  the  conveyance  of  coals  and  copper  is 
facilitated  by  means  of  a  canal. 

The  town  of  Swansea  is  situated  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Tawe,  but  the  river  is 
so  mean  a  stream  that  it  is  in  no  degree  ornamental,  and  does  not  combine  as  a  prominent 
object  with  any  view  of  the  town,  or  any  part  of  it.  All  accounts,  however,  agree  in  pro- 
nouncing Swansea  to  be  one  of  the  handsomest  towns  in  Wales,  and,  as  far  my  observations 
extended,  I  fully  coincide  with  the  general  decision,  though  without  admitting  that  it  is 
absolutely  a  handsome  town.  It  is  a  fashionable  watering-place,  and  in  this  character 
has  of  late  years  received  various  additions  of  lodging-houses,  hotels,  shops,  and  circulating 
libraries,  none  of  which  it  will  be  necessary  for  me  to  describe  more  particularly,  as  a 
Swansea  Guide  has  already  been  published,  which  has  explored  all  the  penetralia  of  the 
place,  and  set  forth  the  names,  quality,  and  situation  of  every  street,  alley,  and  house, 
with  the  utmost  fidelity  and  minuteness.  The  population  is  estimated  at  eight  thousand, 
and  together  with  the  trade  of  the  place,  is  yearly  increasing.  There  are  various  manu- 
factories in  the  town,  a  pottery,  a  soap  factory,  and  numerous  establishments  for  the 
supply  of  the  shipping  with  sail-cloth,  cordage,  and  other  materials.  The  pottery  is  on 
a  very  extensive  scale,  and  rivals  the  works  of  Staffordshire  in  the  excellence  and 
cheapness  of  its  wares. 

I  was  particularly  struck  in  this  neighbourhood,  as  at  Neath,  and  indeed  in  most 
parts  of  this  county  which  I  visited,  with  the  wretched,  filthy,  ragged  appearance  of  the 
lower  orders  of  people.  The  women  are  beyond  all  sufferance  dirty  and  slovenly,  and  as 
they  unfortunately  all  dress  alike,  there  is  no  competition  among  them,  and  they  are 

equally 


70  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

equally  unmoved  by  the  love  of  cleanliness  and  the  shame  of  dirt.  Few  of  them  ever 
wear  shoes  or  stockings,  though  some  do  wear  stocking  legs,  reaching  down  to  the  ancles, 
and  attached  by  a  loop  to  the  great  toe ;  their  outer  garments  are  always  of  woollen,  as 
coarse  as  a  horse-cloth,  and  of  a  dark  colour  that  does  not  require  washing ;  on  their 
heads  they  wear  a  man's  hat,  sometimes  without  a  brim,  sometimes  without  a  crown,  and 
sometimes  without  brim  or  crown,  and  thus  generally  disguised,  they  present  a  form  of 
more  roughness  and  rudeness,  in  the  shape  of  woman,  than  I  ever  saw  in  any  other  part 
of  the  kingdom. 

But  there  is  a  far  more  serious  subject  for  reproof  than  this,  in  the  corruption  of 
morals  and  manners  which  the  increase  of  manufactories  has  occasioned  among  this 
people  within  the  last  half  century.  Wales  has  always  been  considered  as  the  land  of 
simple  virtue,  and  with  its  mountains  and  valleys  has  always  been  connected  the  pleasing 
association  of  a  people  living  beyond  the  common  temptations  of  society,  in  a  state  of 
unadulterated  nature.  But  whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  this  picture  in  the  less  tra- 
velled parts  of  the  principality,  there  is  certainly  none  in  this  county,  where  all  the  usual 
vices  of  vulgar  life  now  grow  as  in  their  proper  soil.  The  women  have  not  escaped  the 
common  contamination ;  the  streets  of  Swansea  are  almost  as  notorious  for  scenes  of  loud 
and  shameless  profligacy  as  the  Point  at  Portsmouth.  That  this  degeneracy  results  from 
the  increase  of  manufactories,  and  the  consequent  attraction  of  a  larger  population  to  one 
point,  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  it  is  unfortunate  that  manufactories,  while  they  tend 
to  bring  people  together,  at  the  same  time  shut  them  out  from  those  advantages  which 
are  necessary  to  the  formation  of  a  decent  society.  As  manufactories  increase,  education 
declines ;  they  afford  employment  in  some  of  their  processes  to  the  weakest  hands,  so  that 
every  child,  as  soon  as  it  can  use  its  fingers,  is  sent  to  work  for  its  shilling,  and  grows  up 
with  no  other  idea,  and  no  better  pride,  than  that  of  earning,  like  those  about  it,  some- 
thing beyond  the  necessaries  of  life  to  spend  in  drunkenness  and  riot.  Parents,  by  their 
own  dissipation,  become  incompetent  to  provide  for  their  children  by  any  other  means  than 
this  early  sacrifice :  the  difference  between  putting  a  child  to  school  at  a  small  expense, 
and  putting  it  to  the  manufactory  at  a  small  profit,  is  material.  The  present  system  of 
'  schools  for  all,'  that  is  rising  in  the  metropolis,  may  in  time  extend  its  advantages  to  the 
extremities  of  the  kingdom ;  and  I  think  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  will  operate 
advantageously,  and  disappoint  the  apprehensions  of  those  who  are  fearful  lest  manufac- 
tures should  give  way  to  morals,  and  the  people  employ  their  hands  with  less  facility  and 
goodwill,  from  the  addition  of  a  little  improvement  to  their  minds,  and  a  little  quickness 
to  their  moral  sense. 

There  are  the  remains  of  an  old  castle  at  Swansea,  which  have  been  long  converted 
into  a  poorhouse  and  a  jail,  and  are  so  confounded  by  this  double  degradation,  and  like- 
wise by  a  familiar  crowd  of  upstart  houses  pressing  upon  them  on  all  sides,  that  there  are 
scarcely  any  traces  left  to  point  out  their  proper  character.  The  castle  was  first  built  by 

Henry 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  71 

Henry  Beaumont,  Earl  of  Warwick,  the  conqueror  of  Gower,  and  very  soon  had  the 
strength  of  its  foundations  put  to  the  test  by  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,  who  besieged  it  in  the 
year  1113,  and  destroyed  all  the  outworks,  but  could  make  no  impression  upon  the  body 
of  the  fortress.  At  subsequent  periods  it  suffered  from  various  attacks  by  the  Welsh,  till 
it  became  attached  to  the  possessions  of  the  see  of  St.  Davids,  when  it  was  rebuilt  by 
Bishop  Gower.  The  most  perfect  part  still  remaining,  the  south-east  front,  is  surmounted 
by  a  range  of  light  circular  arches  supporting  a  parapet,  in  the  style  of  the  episcopal 
palace  of  St.  Davids,  which  was  likewise  built  by  the  same  bishop. 

As  a  watering-place,  Swansea  has  the  advantage  of  a  fine  level  sandy  shore  for  the 
bathers,  and  I  have  never  seen  bathing-sports  pursued  any  where  with  greater  vivacity. 
I  do  not  presume  to  say  what  effect  it  may  have  upon  morality,  but  nothing  can  be  less 
formal  than  the  manner  in  which  both  sexes  bathe  together  at  the  sea-side.  While  the 
ladies  are  walking  on  the  sands,  or  waiting  at  the  water's  edge  for  their  turn  to  be  dipped, 
there  is  usually  a  parcel  of  naked  men  capering  and  roaring  in  the  sea,  who  thus  force 
themselves  upon  observation  by  startling  both  the  eye  and  the  ear.  During  the  two  or 
three  days  that  we  spent  at  Swansea,  the  morning  amusement  of  the  beach  was  principally 
supplied  by  one  individual,  a  gentleman  who,  rather  late  in  life,  was  learning  to  swim. 
He  was  of  enormous  bulk,  which,  combined  with  the  trials  of  an  active  exercise,  exposed 
him  to  the  whole  company  under  circumstances  irresistibly  ridiculous  One  tremendous 
leg  was  suspended  above  the  waves,  while  the  other  was  evidently  on  the  ground,  and  in 
this  buoyant  attitude  he  laboured,  and  sprawled,  and  floundered  about  like  a  stranded 
grampus.  There  should  be  a  master  of  the  ceremonies  for  the  bath  as  well  as  the  ball- 
room, who  should  denounce  all  bathing-machines  that  have  no  awnings,  confine  all  bathers 
under  the  cover  of  the  awning,  and  in  short,  keep  all  parties  asunder  during  their  morning 
recreation  as  studiously  as  he  brings  them  together  in  their  evening  exercise. 

At  some  little  distance  from  the  pier,  and  at  low  water,  you  may  occasionally  see  a 
company  of  industrious  women,  with  their  petticoats  considerably  above  the  line  of 
decency  or  their  knees,  gathering  cockles  and  muscles  among  the  rocks ;  but  let  me  ob- 
serve, to  the  credit  of  these  ladies,  that  they  resent  all  impertinent  intrusion  in  a  tone  of 
indignation,  and,  if  necessary,  with  a  power  of  fist,  that  few  men  would  put  themselves  in 
the  way  of  a  second  time. 

We  made  an  excursion  to  Oystermouth,  a  village  near  the  western  extremity  of 
Swansea  Bay,  in  the  tram  car,  a  singular  kind  of  vehicle  established  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  visitors  to  this  place.  It  is  a  very  long  carriage,  supported  on  four  low  iron  wheels, 
carries  sixteen  persons,  exclusive  of  the  driver,  is  drawn  by  one  horse,  and  rolls  along  over 
an  iron  rail-road,  at  the  rate  of  five  miles  an  hour,  and  with  the  noise  of  twenty  sledge 
hammers  in  full  play.  The  passage  is  only  four  mile's,  but  it  is  quite  sufficient  to  make 
one  reel  from  the  car  at  the  journey's  end,  in  a  state  of  dizziness  and  confusion  of  the 
senses  that  it  is  well  if  he  recovers  from  in  a  week. 

For 


72  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

For  about  a  league  to  the  westward  of  Swansea,  the  coast  continues  to  be  of  the 
mildest  character,  but  at  the  western  side  of  the  bay  it  suddenly  becomes  rude  and 
rugged,  the  land  sweeping  down  to  the  sea  in  an  abrupt  declivity,  with  a  little  vegetation 
near  the  summit,  but  at  the  base  composed  entirely  of  bare  rock.  The  rock  is  limestone, 
and  is  so  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of  its  veins,  that,  when  polished,  it  is  said  not  to  be 
inferior  in  appearance  to  foreign  marble.  Oystermouth  is  a  neat  little  village,  close  to 
the  sea,  and  so  sheltered  by  the  high  land  about  it,  as  to  receive  little  benefit  from  the 
sun  except  its  light.  There  is  a  boarding-house  here  for  strangers,  who  prefer  rocks  and 
seclusion  to  the  noise  and  glare  of  Swansea,  but  the  village  is  principally  inhabited  by 
fishermen.  This  part  of  the  bay  abounds  with  fish,  and  particularly  with  a  very  small 
kind  of  oyster,  which  is  in  high  repute. 

A  little  to  the  northward  of  the  village,  on  a  bold  eminence,  is  Oystermouth  Castle ; 
there  is  nothing  very  worthy  of  examination  in  any  part  of  the  building,  but  there  is  a 
plain,  simple  strength  about  it,  which,  combined  with  its  commanding  situation,  gives  it 
an  air  of  considerable  majesty.  It  is  not  exactly  known  who  was  its  founder ;  but  as 
there  are  no  notices  of  any  castles  in  this  district  before  the  invasion  by  the  Normans,  it 
is  supposed  to  have  been  built  by  Henry  Beaumont,  or  some  of  his  successors  in  Gower. 
The  interior  of  the  building  is  in  a  state  of  utter  ruin ;  but  the  walls  seem  to  be  of  their 
original  height,  and  have  suffered  very  little  in  any  respect  from  time  or  violence. 

From  the  height  on  which  the  castle  stands  we  had  a  varied  and  beautiful  prospect 
before  us,  over  the  whole  of  Swansea  Bay.  The  extent  of  the  bay  from  point  to  point  is 
seven  miles,  and  it  includes  in  its  whole  curve  about  five  leagues.  Except  at  the  western 
extremity,  it  is  girded  on  all  sides  by  a  low  shore,  so  that  a  wide  expanse  of  country  is 
disclosed,  in  a  graceful  crescent  of  hills  aud  plains,  glowing  with  vegetation  and  spotted 
with  villas  and  cottages,  while  the  sea  is  blended  with  every  form  of  the  landscape,  and 
gives  to  all  one  general  effect  of  freshness  and  brilliancy.  A  high  degree  of  elegance  is 
the  distinguishing  character  of  the  scene ;  except  about  the  spot  where  we  stood,  there 
are  no  features  of  ruggedness  or  abruptness ;  all  that  is  distinct,  or  that  forms  the  fore- 
ground of  the  picture,  is  rounded  and  polished,  and  the  bleak  and  lofty  mountains  in  the 
more  remote  parts  of  the  county  are  here  mellowed  into  a  soft  blue  distance. 

Not  far  from  the  village  of  Oystermouth  the  bay  terminates  in  the  Mumble's  Head, 
a  large,  circular  mass  of  rock  gradually  rising  to  a  point,  and  crowned  with  a  lighthouse. 
At  the  time  we  were  near  the  spot  this  rock  formed  an  island,  but  it  is  connected  with 
the  mainland  by  a  narrow  reef  of  rocks,  which  is  dry  at  low  water,  and  may  be  passed  over  on 
foot,  though  not  without  great  difficulty.  The  lighthouse  was  built  in  1794,  and  the 
light  first  exhibited  in  May  of  that  year.  It  is  a  handsome  stone  tower,  sixty  feet  in 
height ;  the  rock  on  which  it  stands  is  about  the  same  height.  The  light  is  of  very 
extensive  utility,  serving  as  a  general  guide  for  all  vessels  navigating  this  part  of  the 
Bristol  Channel,  which  near  the  Welsh  coast  is  obstructed  by  numerous  shoals.  It  is 

particularly 


The  Mumbles  light-house,  in  Swansea  Bay 


The  Worms-head,  in  Tenby  bay 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  73 

particularly  useful  for  the  direction  of  vessels  entering  Swansea  Bay,  which  in  their 
passage  to  the  port  of  Swansea  must  all  approach,  either  the  Scar  Weather,  a  very  long 
sand  near  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  or  the  Mixon,  another  equally  dangerous,  lying 
close  off  the  Mumbles  Head. 

The  shore  immediately  about  the  Mumbles,  and  for  some  distance  both  to  the  west- 
ward and  northward  of  it,  is  strewed  with  large  fragments  of  rock,  the  certain  memorials 
of  encroachments  by  the  sea,  and  it  is  said  that  a  great  extent  of  land  has  been  swallowed 
up  between  this  point  and  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay.  A  former  tourist  in  Wales 
observes,  "  That  the  shores  of  Swansea  Bay  have  suffered  greatly  by  the  encroachment  of 
the  sea,  at  no  very  distant  period,  is  extremely  obvious.  A  wide  extent  of  forest  land 
now  lies  buried  beneath  its  sands.  It  is  confidently  asserted  by  the  natives  that  there  was 
formerly  a  direct  road  from  the  Mumbles  Point  to  Briton  Ferry,  and  that  during  one  of 
the  rebellions  the  country  people  were  afraid  to  pass  through  the  woods  from  that  point 
to  Swansea,  lest  they  should  be  surprised  by  a  banditti  of  freebooters  who  infested  it. 
In  confirmation  of  this  event,  branches  of  trees  are  not  unfrequently  washed  out  of  the 
sands  by  the  sea.  Coidfrank  Forest,  standing  between  Swansea  and  Briton  Ferry,  in  the 
time  of  Speede,  seems  to  have  been  in  a  great  measure,  if  not  entirely  lost,  since  that 
period*."  This,  however,  is  placing  rather  too  much  reliance  on  the  evidence  of  the 
natives  and  the  branches  of  trees,  for  the  pathway  from  the  Mumbles  to  Briton  Ferry 
would  have  placed  Swansea  nearly  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  sea,  and  its  most  ancient 
name  is  Abertawe,  expressive  of  its  situation  at  the  confluence  of  the  river. 

Being  informed  that  we  could  procure  no  beds,  and  probably  no  provisions,  in  the 
western  parts  of  Gower,  we  returned  from  the  Mumbles  to  Swansea,  and  early  on  the 
following  morning  proceeded  by  the  inland  road  to  Oxwich  Bay,  in  a  chaise,  which  we 
sent  on  to  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  that  it  might  meet  us  there  after  we  had  per- 
formed the  circuit  of  the  coast,  and  take  us  back  to  the  land  of  rest  and  plenty. 

After  passing  six  or  seven  miles  from  Swansea,  we  perceived  a  material  alteration  in 
the  face  of  the  country,  which  was  still  more  strongly  marked  as  we  approached  the  sea ; 
the  deep,  rich  pasturage  of  the  meadows  was  exchanged  for  short,  brown  grass,  and  the 
hedge-rows  for  stone  walls.  Trees  became  exceedingly  rare,  and  when  they  did  appear, 
bore  evident  traces  of  their  exposure  to  the  Atlantic,  in  their  branches  turning  from  the 
west,  and  in  their  scanty  and  broken  foliage.  This  cheerless  prospect  was  suddenly  relieved 
by  our  entrance  into  the  grounds  of  Penrice  Castle,  which,  by  prodigious  labour  and 
expense,  have  been  brought  into  a  state  of  excellent  cultivation,  and  by  favour  of  a 
sheltered  situation,  in  some  parts,  have  the  decoration  of  a  little  wood.  It  has  been 
complained,  that  they  are  rather  too  elaborately  ornamental,  and  betray  too  plainly,  in 
their  smooth  lawns,  trim  walks,  and  methodical  fish-ponds,  the  evidences  of  artificial 

*  Donovan'a  Excursions  through  South  Wales* 

arrangement ; 


74  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

arrangement ;  but  where  nature  has  done  so  little,  and  where  she  so  obstinately  resists  all 
improvement,  it  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty  so  to  employ  art  as  to  avoid  the  appear- 
ance of  it.  I  confess  that  I  did  not  observe  any  disagreeable  formality  about  them,  and, 
indeed,  looked  at  them  with  the  more  interest,  as  proclaiming  the  triumph  of  art :  they 
form  at  least  a  little  garden  in  a  wilderness,  and  do  infinite  credit  to  the  skill  and  perse- 
verance of  their  proprietor.  The  grounds  are  bounded  to  the  south  by  a  deep,  barren 
sand,  which  extends  for  about  half  a  mile,  when  it  terminates  in  Oxwich  Bay. 

Within  the  precincts  of  the  grounds  are  the  ruins  of  Penrice  Castle,  which  are  now 
converted  into  an  aviary,  and  near  them  is  a  neat  modern  villa.  The  castle,  like  all  the 
rest  in  this  district,  was  built  by  Henry  Beaumont.  It  was  given  to  the  Penrices,  a 
Norman  family,  who  came  over  to  England  with  William  the  Conqueror,  on  their  settle- 
ment in  Gower,  during  the  reign  of  Edward  the  First.  The  estate  afterwards  devolved 
by  marriage  to  the  Mansels,  and  finally  to  the  Talbots,  in  which  family  it  still  remains. 
Penrice  is  not  a  Norman  name,  but  was  adopted  by  the  family  from  the  original  title  of 
the  place,  and  is  a  corruption  of  Pen  Rhys.  On  this  spot,  Rhys,  the  son  of  Caradoc  ap 
Jestin,  was  slain  in  the  battle  which  secured  to  Henry  Beaumont  the  conquest  of  Gower. 
The  late  Thomas  Mansel  Talbot,  Esq.  was  the  author  of  most  of  the  improvements  on 
the  estate. 

We  had  been  prepared  to  see  some  very  grand  scenery  in  Oxwich  Bay,  but  were 
disappointed :  there  are  some  jagged  rocks  at  the  points,  but  they  are  of  no  great  magni- 
tude, and  soon  give  way  to  sand  hills,  which  bound  nearly  the  whole  semicircle  of  the 
bay.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  about  half  a  mile  from  the  sea,  are  the  ruins  of 
Penarth  Castle,  which  are  almost  ingulphed  by  the  sand.  Two  round  towers,  and  some 
fragments  of  an  embattled  wall,  are  all  that  remain.  History  furnishes  no  memorials  of 
this  castle,  but  the  tradition  of  the  neighbourhood  has  determined  that  it  was  not  con- 
structed by  hands,  but  either  stole  hither  of  its  own  accord,  or  was  planted  by  the  power 
of  enchantment.  A  small  river,  without  a  name,  flows  near  to  the  castle,  and  pours  itself 
into  the  bay  below :  it  rises  among  some  lofty  mountains  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
peninsula,  and  when  swollen  with  rain  probably  bears  down  with  it  a  great  quantity  of 
earth  from  the  sides  of  the  hills,  and  has  contributed  materially  to  the  accumulation  of 
sand  which  surrounds  the  bay. 

On  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay,  and  rather  nearer  to  the  sea  than  Penarth,  are  the 
ruins  of  Oxwich  Castle,  and  as  they  stand  on  harder  ground,  all  the  parts  that  remain  are 
to  be  seen,  though  they  are  insufficient  to  give  any  idea  of  the  original  design  and  extent 
of  the  building.  Castles  are  so  common  in  this  little  district  of  Gower,  which  in  its  whole 
circuit  does  not  exceed  fifty  miles,  that  our  first  question  on  entering  a  village  was 
regularly — which  is  the  way  to  the  castle  ?  and  we  seldom  found  that  our  question  was 
misapplied.  Most  of  them  are  in  a  very  ruinous  condition,  which  may  be  accounted  for 
both  from  the  violent  attacks  of  the  Welsh  during  their  days  of  sieges,  and  the  later 

depredations 


VOTAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  73 

depredations  of  those  who  have  wanted,  or,  as  Dr.  Johnson  expresses  himself  on  a  similar 
occasion,  "  fancied  that  they  wanted"  the  materials  of  which  they  are  composed.  They 
are  all  situated  on  the  coast,  as  it  was  an  important  consideration  with  the  Normans  and 
English  not  only  to  prevent  any  sudden  surprizes  by  the  Welsh,  but  to  have  places  of 
refuge  from  which  they  might  communicate  by  signals  with  English  vessels  in  the  channel, 
and  which  would  enable  them  to  protect  the  disembarkation  of  reinforcements. 

There  are  a  few  cottages  composing  the  village  of  Penrice,  under  the  shelter  of 
Oxwich  Point,  the  western  point  of  the  bay,  and  near  them  a  remarkably  pretty  church, 
surrounded  by  a  few  trees,  which  were  the  last  that  we  noticed  in  the  peninsula. 

After  passing  round  Oxwich  Point,  we  entered  upon  another  sandy  bay  bounded  by 
a  far-projecting  headland,  called  Port  Inon  Point,  from  whence  to  the  western  extremity 
of  the  peninsula  the  coast  is  almost  as  rugged  as  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall,  presenting 
one  unvaried  front  of  naked  and  craggy  rock.  We  had  lately  been  accustomed  to  view 
the  sea  confined  like  a  lake,  and  embellishing  a  beautiful  country  on  its  borders,  but  we 
now  saw  it  again  in  all  its  majesty,  rolling  in  big  waves  upon  the  rocks,  and  scattering 
blight  over  the  country  beyond.  At  frequent  intervals  the  cliffs  are  divided  by  a  wide 
chasm,  with  its  sides  disclosing  huge  fragments  of  rock,  confusedly  jurnbled  together. 
These  chasms  form  a  striking  peculiarity  in  the  character  of  this  coast:  there  is  scarcely 
an  interval  of  half  a  mile  that  is  not  intersected  by  one  of  them,  and  some  extend  nearly 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  inland.  When  we  stood  at  the  extremity  of  one  of  them  near  the  sea, 
so  that  we  could  at  the  same  time  see  the  shattered  front  of  the  cliffs,  the  vast  beds  of 
rock  were  laid  open  on  all  sides  of  us,  and  formed  a  scene  of  ruin  that  was  perfectly 
sublime.  The  effect  of  them  is  rendered  the  more  singular  by  the  flatness  of  the  country 
adjoining  the  coast :  when  you  see  nothing  before  you  but  a  plain,  you  come  without 
warning  upon  the  brink  of  a  tremendous  abyss,  with  the  sea  dashing  below,  at  the  depth 
of  more  than  two  hundred  feet. 

Chasms,  something  of  a  similar  character,  though  on  a  much  smaller  scale,  and  in  a 
very  different  style  of  ornament,  occur  in  the  eastern  parts  of  Glamorganshire,  and  at  a 
little  distance  from  the  sea.  Mr.  Malkin  in  his  Scenery  of  South  Wales  thus  describes 
them.  "  There  is  one  peculiarity  in  the  face  of  this  country  which  I  must  not  omit  to 
mention.  In  the  flat  parts  of  it,  and  near  the  sea  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the 
mountains,  seeing,  as  you  imagine,  the  whole  surface  of  the  ground  for  a  considerable 
stretch,  you  come  suddenly  on  an  abrupt  sinking,  not  deep,  but  perpendicular  as  the  side 
of  a  crag,  of  more  or  less  extent,  forming  a  rich,  woody,  and  retired  shelter,  the  pic- 
turesque properties  of  which  contrast  most  delightfully  with  the  uniform  dulness  of  corn- 
fields. You  pass  through  these  sequestered  dells,  ascend  on  the  other  side,  and  regain 
the  flat."  The  rock  of  the  whole  coast  of  Glamorganshire,  and,  indeed,  of  almost  the 
whole  county,  is  limestone;  and  these  abrupt  gaps,  occasioned  by  the  subsidence  of  the 
strata,  are  common  in  all  limestone  countries.  This  rock  is  speedily  worn  into  caverns 

L  by 


7O  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

by  the  sea,  and  is  likewise  split  and  shivered  by  frost,  so  that  when  the  top  of  a  ca- 
vern is  above  the  reach  of  the  sea,  the  frost  continues  its  operations  till,  in  a  course  of 
ages,  the  superstructure  gives  way. 

After  a  most  laborious  Avalk,  which  was  impeded  not  only  by  the  occasional  inter- 
vention of  these  yawning  gulfs,  but  also  by  a  continued  thicket  of  furze,  we  arrived  at 
the  Worm's  Head,  the  most  western  point  of  Gower.  This  is  a  very  remarkable  promon- 
tory, and  the  most  conspicuous  sea-mark  in  the  channel.  Like  the  Mumble's  Head,  it  is 
connected  with  the  mainland  only  by  a  low  ledge  of  rocks,  which  at  certain  times  of  the 
tide  is  covered  by  the  sea.  From  this  ledge  it  gradually  rises  to  about  the  same  height 
as  the  main  cliffs,  and  runs  out  in  a  straight  line  for  more  than  half  a  mile,  when  it  shelves 
down  nearly  to  a  level  with  the  sea,  and  again  rises  abruptly  in  a  vast  column  of  rock, 
which  towers  above  every  other  part  of  the  promontory.  Its  whole  length  is  said  to  be 
rather  more  than  a  mile,  and  the  rock  in  which  it  terminates  is  at  least  two  hundred  and 
fifty  feet  in  height.  It  derives  its  names  from  some  resemblance  which  seamen  have  sup- 
posed it  bears  to  a  worm  with  its  head  erect,  a  simile  which  at  least  cannot  be  charged 
with  the  sin  of  exaggeration. 

In  the  spring  and  summer  this  promontory  is  covered  with  myriads  of  sea  fowl:  the 
most  remarkable  are  the  Eligugs,  birds  of  passage  of  the  Auk  kind,  and  generally  known, 
I  believe,  by  the  name  of  the  Razor-Bill.  They  make  no  nest,  and  lay  but  one  egg,  which 
they  deposit  on  the  bare  rock.  They  rise  with  great  difficulty  from  the  ground,  and 
therefore  sit  upon  the  ledges  of  the  rocks  impending  over  the  sea,  where  they  are  ranged 
in  close  columns,  tier  above  tier,  from  the  water's  edge  to  the  summit  of  the  cliffs. 
Though  countless  thousands  of  eggs  lie  contiguous,  each  bird  readily  distinguishes  its 
own,  at  least  so  it  may  be  presumed,  for  flocks  of  them  rise  at  once  from  their  seats, 
and  return  again  in  a  body,  and  settle  without  hesitation  or  confusion.  Their  eggs  are 
frequently  laid  upon  the  smooth  surface  of  shelving  rocks,  and  it  is  supposed  that  they 
are  prevented  from  rolling  off  by  the  nicety  with  which  they  are  balanced.  This  does  not 
appear  probable,  for  if  their  support  depended  upon  so  delicate  an  equilibrium,  the  least 
puff  of  wind  would  be  sufficient  to  upset  them.  Some  ornithologists  have  conjectured  that 
the  eggs  are  enveloped  in  some  glutinous  matter,  which  confines  them  to  the  rocks;  and 
this  fact,  one  would  think,  might  be  easily  ascertained,  for  if  the  egg  really  sticks  to  the 
rock,  some  little  resistance  might  be  perceived  on  removing  it.  Our  guide,  who  informed 
us  that  he  had  taken  many  hundred  eggs  in  his  time,  rather  inclined  to  the  opinion  of 
some  marvellous  equilibrium,  and  declared  that  he  had  often  removed  an  egg,  which  he 
could  by  no  art  replace  on  the  same  spot  from  whence  he  had  taken  it.  Nevertheless,  it 
is  most  probable  that  there  is  some  slight  cement,  though  it  may  have  escaped  the  ob- 
servation of  our  heavy-handed  informant. 

The  Eligugs  come  to  this  country  early  in  April,  and  prepare  for  the  important 
business  of  incubation  in  May:  in  July  their  young  are  fledged,  and  early  in  August  the 

whole 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  77 

whole  flock  disappears.  When  the  young  bird  is  able  to  fly  and  pick  up  shrimps  for 
itself,  the  mother  shoves  it  down  from  the  rocks  into  the  sea,  and  by  this  short  act  is  at 
once  relieved  from  all  further  care  and  regard  for  an  object  which,  during  three  months, 
she  had  scarcely  left  for  a  moment. 

These  birds  seem  to  be  exposed  to  no  enemy  but  man,  from  whose  rapacious  inva- 
sions precipices  cannot  secure  them.  Places  were  pointed  out  to  us  to  which  people  had 
climbed  in  pursuit  of  a  few  eggs,  which  no  combination  of  courage  and  caution  could  have 
enabled  them  to  reach,  but  at  the  imminent  risk  of  their  lives.  To  the  love  of  eggs  is 
added  that  powerful  attraction  called  sport,  and  under  this  double  impulse  a  man  sees 
no  danger,  or  at  least  knows  no  fear.  The  people  are  sometimes  lowered  down  by  ropes 
from  the  top  of  the  cliff,  and  this  is  the  safest  plan,  though  the  jagged  projections  of  the 
rocks  render  it  a  difficult  and  painful  service.  The  birds  are  sometimes  eaten,  but,  like 
all  other  sea-fowl,  they  are  reported  to  be  exceedingly  rank. 

From  the  heights  near  the  Worm's  Head  we  had  a  view  of  the  whole  curve  of 
Caermarthen  Bay,  with  Caldy  Island,  its  western  horn,  nearly  opposite  to  us,  and  distant 
about  fifteen  miles.  The  Caermarthenshire  coast  forms  the  front  of  this  bay,  and  is  so 
low  that  we  could  scarcely  distinguish  its  line  of  termination ;  the  cliffs  of  Devonshire  ap- 
peared to  the  south,  still  clearly  marked,  at  the  distance  of  thirty  miles.  To  the  north- 
ward of  the  Worm's  Head  the  coast  of  Gower  becomes  less  bold  and  rugged,  and  we 
continued  our  walk  without  occasion  for  a  pause  to  Whitford  Point,  which  stretches  out 
for  more  than  a  mile  in  a  line  of  sandhills,  and  forms  the  most  northern  point  of  the  pe- 
ninsula. The  extremity  of  this  point  is  not  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  coast 
of  Caermarthenshire,  which  runs  parallel  to  the  north  coast  of  Gower,  and  is  separated 
from  it  by  the  estuary  of  the  Lloughor  river.  To  the  eastward  of  Whitford  Point  there 
is  a  well-sheltered  haven,  which  will  admit  vessels  of  two  hundred  tons.  The  river  Burry, 
a  very  small  stream,  pours  itself  into  this  haven,  and  the  whole  frith  between  the  two 
coasts  is  commonly,  though  improperly,  called  the  Burry  River.  Both  banks  of  the 
Lloughor  are  quite  flat,  from  Whitford  Point  to  the  village  of  Lloughor,  where  the  river 
alters  its  course,  and  turning  to  the  northward  continues  to  divide  the  counties  of  Gla- 
morganshire and  Caermarthenshire.  As  the  evening  was  advancing,  and  as  there  was 
nothing  further  to  attract  us,  we  hastened  back  from  Whitford  Point  to  Rosilly,  a 
small  village  near  the  Worm's  Head,  where  our  chaise  was  in  waiting,  and  returned  to 
Swansea. 

On  consulting  here  with  some  friends  on  the  best  mode  of  pursuing  our  voyage,  we 
were  informed  that  we  should  find  the  Caermarthenshire  coast  extremely  uninteresting, 
and  should  escape  much  useless  toil  and  delay  by  avoiding  it  altogether,  and  proceeding 
by  the  inland  road  to  Tenby.  We  had  already  lost  so  much  time  by  the  necessity  of  re- 
turning to  Swansea  from  our  excursions  in  Gower,  that  we  determined  to  adopt  this  plan, 

and 


78  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  we  did  it  with  the  less  hesitation,  as  we  had  had  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining  by 
our  own  observations  that  the  general  character  of  the  Caermarthenshire  coast  was  tame 
and  uniform.  Its  whole  extent  from  east  to  west  is  about  twenty-five  miles.  From  the 
mouth  of  the  Lloughor  to  the  mouth  of  the  Towy,  it  is  extended  in  a  dreary  flat  marsh, 
bounded  towards  the  sea  by  a  long  chain  of  sand  hills ;  the  marsh  terminates  at  the  Towy, 
but  the  sand  hills  continue  with  little  interruption  to  the  western  extremity  of  the  coast. 
At  low  water  the  sea  retires  to  a  very  great  distance  from  the  shore,  leaving  dry  a  wide 
plain  of  sand  along  the  whole  line  of  the  coast.  This  accumulation  of  sand  has  been 
formed  by  the  co-operation  of  five  rivers,  the  Lloughor,  the  Gwendraeth  Vawr,  the 
Gwendraeth  Vychan,  the  Towy,  and  the  Tave,  which,  within  the  space  of  sixteen  miles, 
all  empty  themselves  into  Caermarthen  Bay. 

The  towns  and  villages  on  this  coast  were  not  represented  to  us  as  sufficiently  im- 
portant to  compensate  for  the  deficiency  of  all  other  objects  of  interest.  The  town  of 
Kidwelly,  the  village  of  Llanstephan,  and  the  town  of  Llaugharne,  have  each  the  ruins  of 
a  castle;  but  we  had  already  seen  so  many  castles,  and  in  the  course  of  our  progress 
through  Wales  were  about  to  see  so  many  more,  that  we  deviated  from  these  without  the 
smallest  compunction.  They  were  all  founded  by  the  Normans,  and  the  history  of  them 
all  is  unvaried  and  uninteresting.  Some  dispute  originating  in  that  constant  animosity 
Avhich  subsisted  between  the  Welsh  and  the  Normans  and  English,  is  followed  at  once  by 
a  general  clatter  of  arms,  in  which  we  hear  of  no  particular  instances  of  individual 
heroism  or  suffering:  the  parties  meet,  the  castle  is  stormed  and  destroyed,  and  the  busi- 
ness ends  in  one  gross  account  of  blood.  After  this  event  the  castle  is  rebuilt,  and  we 
speedily  hear  of  it  again,  when  the  Lord  Rhys,  or  some  other  scatterer  of  foes,  is  under 
its  walls,  who  assaults  it,  takes  it  and  burns  it,  and  then  leaves  it  to  be  burned  and  built 
again.  In  a  protracted  siege  there  might  be  some  circumstances  to  awaken  sympathy, 
and  make  one  a  party  in  the  cause,  but  one  is  quite  confounded  by  this  peremptory 
mode  of  battery :  before  we  have  time  to  feel  a  preference  and  choose  our  side,  the  castle 
is  down  and  the  garrison  butchered  to  the  last  man.  If  these  rapid  assaults  were  con- 
nected with  any  one  great  event  in  the  history  of  the  country,  they  might  still  be  worthy 
of  some  attention;  but  they  are  merely  little  detached  interludes,  endlessly  repeated,  and 
leading  to  nothing.  The  Welsh  could  never  combine  with  unanimity  in  the  defence  of 
their  liberty;  they  were  always  split  into  divisions,  some  fighting  against  their  common 
enemies,  and  some  fighting  against  each  other,  and  were  thus  involved  for  many  centuries 
in  a  state  of  constant  and  promiscuous  Avarfare.  We  are  sometimes  hurried  along  with 
enthusiasm  in  the  train  of  a  Welsh  chieftain,  who,  fired  with  a  just  indignation,  falls 
fiercely  upon  his  oppressors,  the  Normans,  but  in  the  very  moment  of  victory,  he  sud- 
denly leaves  us  in  the  lurch,  turns  his  arms,  on  a  perfectly  new  principle,  against  a  rival 
chieftain  of  his  own  country,  and  after  an  ample  indulgence  in  slaughter  and  pillage,  re- 
tires 


VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  79 

tires  to  his  home.  In  the  mean  time  the  Normans  recover  from  their  defeat,  restore 
their  fortifications,  and  we  then  find  ourselves  exactly  in  statu  quo,  and  with  very  little 
passion  to  begin  again. 

As  speed  was  our  great  object  in  our  journey  from  Swansea  to  Tenby,  we  had  but 
little  time  for  observation,  and  I  shall  not  trouble  the  reader  with  any  of  those  vague  re- 
marks which  it  was  permitted  me  to  make  through  a  chaise  window,  or  while  trifling  for 
a  moment  with  the  goat  or  the  raven  in  the  yard  of  an  inn. 

The  coast  of  Pembrokeshire  commences  about  four  miles  to  the  northward  of  Tenby, 
near  New  Inn,  a  little  village  with  a  most  perfidious  name,  set  up  as  a  snare  for  the  un- 
wary, who  may  go  thither  in  the  simplicity  of  their  hearts  and  the  emptiness  of  their 
stomachs  for  food  and  refreshment.  It  consists  of  a  few  fishermen's  cottages,  and  does 
not  offer  in  any  of  its  departments  even  the  humblest  apology  for  the  assurance  of  its 
title.  From  this  point  the  coast  recedes  into  a  spacious  sandy  bay,  called  Sandersfoot, 
bounded  by  Monkstone  Head ;  here  it  suddenly  assumes  a  new  character,  and  continues 
to  the  southward  in  a  broken  line  of  lofty,  naked,  and  precipitous  cliffs,  till  it  terminates 
in  a  bold  promontory,  on  which  stands  the  town  of  Tenby.  The  space  between  this 
promontory  and  Monkstone  Head  is  called  Tenby  Bay,  but  the  coast  is  extremely  irre- 
gular, and  forms  many  smaller  bays  and  promontories. 

There  is  something  exceedingly  wild  and  romantic  in  the  appearance  of  the  town, 
rising  abruptly  from  the  sea,  and  mingling  with  all  the  ruggedness  of  the  coast.  It  com- 
mands a  very  extensive  sea  view,  diversified  by  numerous  points  of  distant  land  which 
break  the  horizon:  to  the  west  the  coast  of  Gower  clearly  defined,  and  to  the  south  the 
long  and  misty  line  of  the  Devonshire  mountains.  When  we  turn  to  contemplate  the 
inland  prospect  there  is  little  to  admire;  the  country  is  almost  destitute  of  wood,  and 
every  kind  of  vegetation  that  is  permitted  to  appear  is  tarnished  and  tattered  by  the 
western  wind. 

Tenby  has  been  raised  within  the  last  twenty  years  from  an  obscure  fishing  town 
into  a  fashionable  watering-place;  it  has  one  range  of  .very  good  lodging-houses,  a  large 
hotel,  and  one  of  a  subordinate  character,  and  boasts  among  its  more  luxurious  establish- 
ments a  theatre  and  a  billiard -room.  This  sudden  accession  of  prosperity  so  inflated  the 
minds  of  the  natives,  and  so  far  intoxicated  them,  that  they  lost  all  sense  of  moderation. 
Some  few  summers  since,  every  article  included  in  the  requisitions  of  the  visitors  was 
raised  to  so  monstrous  a  price,  that  they  determined  with  one  consent  to  abandon  the 
place.  A  season  of  empty  houses  had  the  expected  effect,  and  Tenby  is  now  not  more 
extravagant,  I  believe,  than  other  places  of  the  same  description. 

Sir  William  Paxton  has  been  a  great  benefactor  to  the  town,  and  the  patron  of  most 
of  its  modern  improvements.  This  gentleman  lately  erected  some  very  large  baths  at  an 
immense  expense,  after  the  design  of  Mr.  Cockerell.  The  building  is  very  ornamental  to 
the  town,  and  includes  a  multiplicity  of  accommodations;  hot-baths,  vapour-baths,  cold- 

baths, 


80  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

baths,  a  cupping-room,  bed-rooms,  and  lastly,  a  reading-room,  copiously  supplied  with 
newspapers,  and  various  publications  on  the  benefits  of  bathing  and  the  art  of  swimming. 
Before  I  make  any  remarks  on  the  ancient  state  of  Tenby,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
mention  a  few  circumstances  of  the  general  history  of  Pembrokeshire,  which  are  inti- 
mately connected  with  it.  The  whole  southern  part  of  the  county  was  colonized  in  the 
reign  of  Henry  the  First  by  a  large  body  of  Flemings,  which,  like  the  colony  in  Gower, 
defended  itself  successfully  against  all  the  resistance  of  the  Welsh.  The  conduct  of  a 
foreign  people  thus  established  in  a  little  corner  of  a  hostile  country  forms  an  interesting 
subject  of  enquiry,  and  one  might  have  expected  to  find  full  documents  relating  to  the 
means  by  which  they  obtained  their  territory,  and  the  power  and  policy  by  which  they 
maintained  it.  But  unfortunately  history  has  overlooked  the  Flemings  in  Pembrokeshire, 
or  at  least  has  confined  all  its  memorials  of  them  Avithin  a  very  few  lines.  The  particulars 
of  their  settlement  in  Wales  are  thus  related  by  Hollinshed.  "  A.  D.  1107,  about  this 
season  a  great  part  of  Flanders  being  drowned  by  an  inundation  or  breaking  in  of  the 
sea,  a  great  number  of  Flemings  came  into  England,  beseeching  the  king  to  have  some 
void  place  assigned  them  wherein  they  might  inhabit.  At  first  they  were  appointed  to 
the  countrie  being  on  the  east  part  of  the  river  Tweed,  but  within  foure  years  after  they 
were  removed  into  a  corner  by  the  sea-side  in  Wales,  called  Pembrokeshire,  to  the  end 
they  might  be  a  defence  there  to  the  English  against  the  unquiet  Welshmen.  It  should 
appeare  by  some  writers  that  this  multitude  of  Flemings  consisted  not  of  such  only  as 
came  over  about  that  time,  by  reason  their  countrie  was  overflowne  by  the  sea  (as  ye  have 
heard),  but  of  other  also  that  arrived  here  long  before,  even  in  the  daies  of  William  the 
Conqueror,  through  the  friendship  of  the  queene,  their  countriewoman;  sithins  which 
time  their  number  so  increased,  that  the  realme  of  England  was  sore  pestered  with  them; 
whereupon  King  Henry  devised  to  place  them  in  Pembrokeshire,  as  well  as  to  avoid  them 
out  of  the  other  parts  of  England,  as  also  by  their  helpe,  to  tame  the  bold  and  presump- 
tuous fierceness  of  the  Welshmen,  which  thing  in  those  parties  they  brought  very  well  to 
passe;  for  after  they  were  settled  there,  they  valiantly  resisted  their  enemies,  and  made 
verie  sharpe  warres  upon  them,  sometimes  with  gaine  and  sometimes  with  losse." — This 
account  is  confirmed  by  other  historians  both  English  and  Welsh,  but  little  is  added  to  it. 
When  Henry  devised  to  place  these  foreigners  in  Wales,  it  does  not  appear  that  there  was 
any  difficulty  in  securing  their  admission,  and  as  the  Normans  had  at  that  time  a  military 
force  in  Pembrokeshire  employed  against  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,  it  is  probable  that  they  as- 
sisted the  Flemings  in  the  reduction  of  the  Welsh,  and  joined  with  them  in  the  formation 
of  the  new  settlement.  No  mention  is  made  of  any  men  of  rank  among  the  Flemings ;  and 
it  is  supposed  by  some  that  they  were  a  subordinate  part  of  the  colony,  and  were  employed 
only  as  soldiers,  artificers,  and  manufacturers,  under  the  government  of  Norman  chief- 
tains. Mr.  Fenton  in  his  Historical  Tour  through  Pembrokeshire,  observes,  "  That  in 
all  the  legal  instruments  of  those  days,  and  for  three  hundred  years  after,  the  names  of 

the 


Tenby,  Pembrokeshire 


The  Eligug-stack,  near  St.  Gowanshead,  Pembrokeshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  81 

the  attesting  witnesses,  who  were  usually  men  of  the  first  note,  or  ecclesiastics,  appear  to 
be  of  Norman  origin,  and  are  characterized  by  the  articles  de  la  and  de,  or  the  prefix  of 
Fitz,  proving  the  new  settlers  to  be  of  an  inferior  class,  as  no  Flemish  names  ever,  or  very 
rarely,  occur  in  such  attestations."  The  English  language  is  now  universally  spoken  in 
the  south  of  Pembrokeshire,  and  as  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  it  has  been  adopted  for 
many  centuries,  it  tends  to  prove  that  the  numbers,  at  least  of  the  Normans,  or  rather 
the  Norman-English,  in  the  early  settlement  were  considerable,  though  the  Flemings, 
during  their  previous  residence  in  England,  might  have  acquired  some  knowledge  of  the 
language,  and  speedily  have  improved  it  by  their  constant  commercial  intercourse  with 
the  country.  Whateter  rank  they  bore  in  the  colony,  it  is  certain  that  they  contributed 
largely  by  their  valour  to  its  security;  and  by  their  industry  and  ingenuity  to  the 
advancement  of  its  wealth  and  importance.  There  are  numerous  specimens  of  their 
architectural  skill  in  the  construction  of  castles  and  fortifications  still  remaining  in  the 
districts  which  they  occupied ;  and  these  certainly  prove  that  there  must  have  been  some 
among  them  far  above  the  rank  of  common  labourers,  though  there  may  have  been  no 
men  of  high  birth  and  distinction. 

In  the  few  observations  which  are  made  upon  them  by  the  Welsh  historians  they 
are  generally  described  as  a  most  treacherous  and  dishonest  people ;  but  Giraldus  Cam- 
brensis  speaks  of  them  more  favourably,  and  represents  them  as  a  bold,  hardy,  and 
enterprizing  race,  well  versed  in  commerce,  despising  danger  and  fatigue  in  the  pursuit 
of  gain  by  sea  or  land,  and  equally  skilful  and  active  in  the  service  of  the  plough  as  the 
sword.  It  is  true  that  with  this  disposition  they  may  have  combined  treachery  and  dis- 
honesty ;  and  if  neither  of  these  base  qualities  were  inherent  parts  of  their  national 
character,  they  may  both  have  been  induced  by  the  peculiarity  of  their  circumstances 
and  situation  in  Wales.  That  the  Welsh  should  have  reproached  them  as  a  worthless 
people  is  not  surprising,  and  though  they  may  have  been  a  little  warped  in  their  judgment 
by  prejudice,  yet  they  are  evidently  not  without  some  justification  in  applying  the  term 
dishonesty  to  a  horde  of  vagabonds  who  were  forced  upon  them  by  an  act  of  violent  and 
unprincipled  usurpation. 

Of  the  present  descendants  of  the  Flemings  in  Pembrokeshire,  it  will  be  unnecessary 
to  say  much :  time  has  long  obliterated  the  recollection  of  their  ancient  feuds,  and  so  far 
equalized  them  in  every  essential  point  of  character  and  manners  with  their  neighbours, 
that  they  are  to  be  recognized  as  a  distinct  people  only  by  their  language ;  and  this  cause 
of  separation,  as  I  have  before  observed,  is  generally  and  rapidly  on  the  decline.  It  has 
been  thought  extraordinary  that  a  race  once,  according  to  the  authority  of  Giraldus,  so 
strongly  marked,  and  so  opposite  in  many  respects  to  the  people  among  whom  they 
settled,  should  at  present  discover  scarcely  any  national  peculiarities  whatever;  but  when 
we  remember  how  much  they  have  been  intermixed  with  the  Normans,  the  English,  and 
the  Welsh,  since  the  first  settlement  of  the  Flemings  in  Wales,  and  when  we  take  into 

consideration 


82  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

consideration  the  complete  alteration  in  their  habits  of  life,  and  in  the  whole  frame  of 
society  throughout  the  country,  it  would  be  far  more  startling  to  find  them  still  retaining 
any  uncommon  distinctions. 

The  town  of  Tenby  was  most  probably  founded  by  the  Flemings;  and  it  is  certain 
that  it  was  one  of  their  strongest  and  most  important  posts.  Its  natural  situation  tended 
to  give  it  security,  and  it  was  surrounded  by  walls,  which  were  low  where  the  assistance 
of  art  was  scarcely  necessary,  but  on  two  sides  strong  and  lofty,  and  flanked  with  towers. 
A  great  part  of  these  walls  is  still  remaining,  as  are  also  some  fragments  of  a  castle,  by 
which  the  town  was  further  defended. 

There  are  a  few  facts  in  the  Welsh  Chronicle  relating  to  the  early  exploits  of  the 
Flemings  in  Tenby,  which  show  that  conciliatory  measures  formed  the  least  portion  of 
their  policy.  In  the  year  1150,  Cadelh,  the  son  of  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,  being  not  only  a  great 
warrior  but  a  keen  sportsman,  uncoupled  his  hounds  and  followed  the  stag  with  a  few- 
companions  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Tenby,  when  he  was  suddenly  surprised  by  some  of 
the  inhabitants,  who  seeing  that  the  party  was  small  and  unarmed,  attacked  them  fiercely, 
and  wounded  Cadelh  so  severely  that  he  escaped  with  difficulty  to  his  home,  where  he  lay 
long  in  a  dangerous  state.  This  violent  and  unprovoked  aggression  in  a  time  of  peace, 
called  forth  the  vengeance  of  Meredy th  and  Rhys,  the  brothers  of  Cadelh,  who  entered 
the  territory  of  Gower,  where  it  is  supposed  there  was  another  body  of  Flemings,  and 
after  burning  and  destroying  without  mercy,  returned  from  their  incursion  loaded  with 
spoil.  This  was  rather  a  circuitous  mode  of  retaliation ;  but  in  the  following  year 
they  suddenly  turned  their  arms  against  Tenby,  scaled  the  castle  before  the  garrison 
had  any  warning  of  their  danger,  and  obtaining  possession,  expended  their  fury 
upon  their  more  immediate  enemies.  Two  years  after  this  event  Meredyth  died,  at 
the  age  of  twenty-five,  and  is  reported,  by  the  historians  of  his  country,  to  have  been  a 
worthy  knight,  just  and  liberal  to  all  men.  His  brother,  the  Lord  Rhys,  after  a  stormy 
life,  principally  employed,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  times,  in  destroying  castles,  died 
in  the  year  1196.  He  was  the  terror  of  the  Flemings,  whom  he  persecuted  with  great 
vigour  and  success.  He  has  received  a  still  more  liberal  eulogy  than  his  brother,  being 
styled  the  hope  and  the  anchor  of  South  Wales ;  "  the  overthrower  of  the  mighty,  and 
setter  up  of  the  weak ;  the  overturner  of  the  holds,  the  separator  of  troops,  the  scatterer 
of  his  foes,  among  whom  he  appeared  as  a  Avild  boar  among  whelps,  or  a  lion  that  for 
anger  beateth  his  tail  to  the  ground*."  Maelgwn,  the  son  of  this  hero,  emulated  the 
glory  of  his  father,  and  in  the  year  1188  made  a  desperate  attack  upon  Tenby,  and 
reduced  the  castle  and  the  whole  town  to  ashes.  In  summing  up  my  present  remarks 
upon  this  illustrious  family  let  me  observe,  that  Maelgwn  was  not  denied  his  full  pro- 
portion of  praise :  he  is  said  to  have  been  fair  and  comely  in  his  person,  just  and  honest, 
beloved  by  his  friends,  and  dreaded  by  his  enemies. 

*  History  of  Cambria,  by  D.  Powel. 

The 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  85 

The  castle  of  Tenby  was  rebuilt  soon  after  this  last  assault  by  William  de  la  Grace, 
Earl  of  Pembroke ;  the  town  was  also  restored,  and  as  the  spirit  of  the  Welsh  became 
broken,  the  inhabitants  transferred  their  attention  to  the  arts  of  peace,  and  by  their 
activity  advanced  Tenby  to  a  state  of  considerable  commercial  importance.  The  manu- 
facture of  woollen  formed  the  principal  source  of  its  wealth.  It  received  repeated  charters, 
conferring  on  it  numerous  and  valuable  privileges,  from  the  time  of  Edward  the  Second 
to  -that  of  Elizabeth ;  but  a  little  before  the  latter  reign  had,  from  causes  that  are  unex- 
plained, fallen  into  some  decay,  and  soon  after  rapidly  declined  into  complete  obscurity, 
from  which  it  never  recovered  till  lately  brought  into  notice  as  a  watering-place.  It  was 
employed,  however,  as  a  military  post  after  it  had  lost  all  other  pretensions.  The  castle 
was  garrisoned  for  the  king  during  the  civil  wars  in  1644,  and  was  taken  by  storm,  after 
a  siege  of  three  days,  by  the  forces  of  the  parliament  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Langhorn.  This  officer,  together  with  Colonel  Poyer,  who  in  1647  had  been  appointed 
governor  of  Pembroke  Castle,  thinking  their  services  in  some  way  ill  requited,  changed 
their  party,  and  held  the  castles  for  the  king.  General  Cromwell  was  sent  into  Wales  with 
eight  thousand  troops  to  quell  this  insurrection ;  and  Tenby,  after  a  resolute  defence,  sur- 
rendered by  capitulation.  This  was  the  last  military  service  in  which  the  castle  was 
engaged :  the  more  ignoble  assaults,  which  have  reduced  it  to  its  present  ruinous 
condition,  are  not  commemorated. 

We  were  informed  by  a  gentleman  residing  at  Tenby,  that  a  few  years  since 
numerous  remains  of  ancient  buildings,  well  worth  preserving,  were  scattered  about  the 
town,  all  of  which  have  successively  given  way  to  the  ruthless  hand  of  improvement. 
The  church  is  of  considerable  antiquity,  but  has  been  built  at  different  periods  and  in  dif- 
ferent styles  of  architecture,  none  of  which  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty.  There  are  some 
handsome  monuments  within ;  the  most  conspicuous  of  which  are  those  erected  to  the 
memory  of  John  and  Thomas  White,  two  brothers,  who  were  opulent  merchants  of  Tenby 
in  the  fifteenth  century.  In  an  account  of  Pembrokeshire  by  George  Owen,  an  anti- 
quary in  the  time  of  Elizabeth,  it  is  related  that  the  Earl  of  Richmond,  afterwards  Henry 
the  Seventh,  fled,  together  with  his  uncle  Jasper,  from  Pembroke  Castle  to  Tenby,  and 
that  Thomas  White  was  active  in  their  cause ;  saved  them  from  the  pursuit  of  their  enemies ; 
and  furnished  them  with  the  vessel  by  which  they  escaped  to  sea.  After  the  battle  of 
Bosworth  Field,  Henry  did  not  forget  his  benefactor,  but  granted  him  a  lease  (at  what 
rent  is  not  recorded)  of  all  the  crown  lands  about  Tenby.  The  two  brothers  are  repre- 
sented recumbent  on  their  respective  tombs,  clad  in  long  robes,  and  each  with  a 
mercatorial  badge,  in  the  form  of  an  enormous  purse,  hanging  from  his  girdle.  The  front 
of  the  tombs  is  ornamented  with  figures  in  basso  relievo,  representing  various  members  of 
the  family.  The  whole  is  an  excellent  style  of  sculpture.  There  are  some  other  monu- 
ments worthy  of  notice,  but  their  history  would  lead  me  into  too  long  a  digression. 

M  Tenby 


VOYAGE  KOUVD  GREAT  BU1TAJN. 


Tenby  has  a  small  but  very  secure  harbour,  with  a  beautiful  little  pier,  apparently  of 
oreat  age,  extending  in  a  serpentine  line,  and  terminating  in  a  kind  of  circular  bastion. 
Near  the  pier-head  is  a  small  shed,  called  St.  Julian's  Chapel,  where  in  ancient  days  the 
fishermen  used  to  assemble  to  hear  prayers  read  for  their  safety  and  success  before  they 
ventured  to  sea.  The  officiating  minister  received  a  halfpenny  for  each  man,  and  a  penny 
for  each  boat,  as  an  acknowledgment  for  his  services.  This  holy  building  was  some 
years  ago  degraded  into  a  bathing-house,  and  is  at  present  still  more  shamefully  outraged 
by  its  conversion  into  a  blacksmith's  shop. 

Tenby  has  been  restored  to  importance  only  as  a  place  of  amusement,  and  has 
recovered  no  portion  of  its  former  commerce.  The  harbour  is  generally  full  of  vessels, 
but  they  belong  to  other  ports,  and  lie  here  only  for  convenience  or  shelter.  They  consist 
principally  of  colliers,  and  take  in  their  cargoes  at  Sandersfoot  Bay,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  which  there  are  some  extensive  collieries :  as  the  bay  is  dangerous  and  exposed,  they 
never  venture  to  ground  there  except  when  they  are  certain  of  being  immediately  freighted 
and  discharged.  At  a  very  early  period  Tenby  was  celebrated  for  its  fisheries,  and  ob- 
tained from  the  Welsh  the  appellation  of  Dinby  y  Piscoid.  Caermarthen  Bay,  whence 
it  procured  its  supplies,  is  still  stocked  with  a  great  abundance  and  variety  offish;  but  so 
far  have  the  present  natives  lost  all  that  spirit  of  enterprize  which  marked  their  ancestors, 
that  they  see  this  source  of  wealth,  to  which  they  have  the  first  pretension,  at  least  by 
right  of  situation,  engrossed  by  other  and  more  active  adventurers.  In  the  summer  season 
ten  or  twelve  large  smacks  from  Dartmouth  and  Torbay  lie  here  and  catch  an  immense 
quantity  of  fish,  for  which  they  have  a  ready  and  certain  market  at  Bristol.  There  are 
only  a  few  small  boats  belonging  to  the  town,  so  that  Dinby  y  Piscoid  is  at  present  very 
sparingly  supplied  with  fish. 

At  the  east  end  of  the  pier  rises  the  Castle  Hill,  forming  the  extreme  point  of  the 
promontory  on  which  the  town  is  built.  The  ruins  of  the  castle  are  on  the  summit,  and 
though  they  are  too  trifling  to  give  any  idea  of  the  original  size  and  form  of  the  building, 
yet  they  are  sufficiently  striking  to  give  some  dignity  to  the  rugged  steep  which  supports 
them.  A  square  tower  and  a  large  circular  bastion  at  the  eastern  extremity,  and  a  round 
tower  on  the  highest  part  of  the  hill,  are  all  the  parts  that  remain.  On  the  south  side 
there  are  some  ruined  walls  of  other  buildings,  but  of  too  modern  a  date  to  be  looked 
upon  as  any  thing  but  vulgar  rubbish :  they  have  no  character  of  military  works,  and  are 
supposed  to  have  been  storehouses. 

Opposite  to  the  Castle  Hill,  and  not  more  than  fifty  yards  distant  from  it,  is  St. 
Catherine's  Island,  a  large  mass  of  craggy  rock,  with  a  sprinkling  of  earth  and  vegetation 
on  the  summit.  It  is  accessible  at  low  water,  and  may  be  ascended,  though  by  a  steep 
and  difficult  path.  The  saint  whose  name  it  bears  was  formerly  considered  a  most  im- 
portant personage,  being  the  grand  patroness  of  the  woollen  manufacture.  If  from  the 

force 


VOYAGE    11OUN1J    UltKAT    BllITAIN.  85 

force  of  old  habits  she  still  regards  this  valuable  business  with  affection,  and  from  the 
superiority  which  Welsh  flannel  still  retains  over  every  other  it  may  be  presumed  she 
does,  her  affection  is  perfectly  gratuitous,  for  her  worship  is  fallen  into  total  disuse. 

To  the  southward  of  the  Castle  Hill  the  coast  again  recedes  into  a  bay,  about  two 
miles  across,  and  is  low  and  sandy ;  but  the  rocks  rise  again  at  Gilter  Point,  a  headland, 
which  bounds  the  bay.  Opposite  to  this  point,  and  at  the  distance  of  rather  more  than 
half  a  mile,  is  St.  Margaret's  Island,  connected  with  which  by  a  long  reef  of  rocks,  par- 
tially dry  at  low  water,  is  the  Island  of  Caldey.  Many  of  these  small  islands  on  this 
coast,  and  they  are  numerous,  have  been  canonized  by  the  holy  presence  of  monks  and 
devotees.  The  natural  seclusion  and  tranquillity  of  such  situations  were  particularly 
favourable  to  religious  meditation,  and  they  afforded  likewise  a  secure  retreat  from  the 
continual  broils  between  the  Flemings  and  the  Welsh,  in  which  the  cowl,  perhaps,  had  it 
been  in  the  way,  might  not  have  been  held  altogether  sacred.  St.  Margaret's  Island  is 
rocky,  and,  except  from  one  or  two  points,  inaccessible.  The  particular  order  of 
recluses  that  lingered  upon  this  rock  is  not  known ;  but  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  religious 
building  upon  it,  from  whose  form  of  construction  conjecture  may  draw  various  inferences. 
It  is  divided  into  numerous  small  apartments,  in  none  of  which,  when  the  roof  was  on, 
could  any  man  more  than  four  feet  high  have  stood  upright.  A  nursery  at  once  presents 
itself  to  the  mind  on  a  view  of  these  pigmy  premises,  but  as  such  an  establishment  was 
not  among  the  necessities  of  monastic  life,  we  may  suppose  that  they  formed  a  house  of 
penance,  a  kind  of  stocks,  in  which  the  disorderly  and  contumacious  were  brought  down 
upon  their  knees.  On  Caldey  Island  there  are  remains  of  more  extensive  buildings,  and 
of  a  less  questionable  character.  A  priory  was  founded  here  by  Robert,  the  son  of 
Martin  de  Turribus,  one  of  the  early  Norman  invaders  of  Wales.  The  same  person  like- 
wise founded  the  abbey  of  St.  Dogmaels,  on  the  banks  of  the  Teivy,  to  which  this  on 
Caldey  was  subordinate.  Many  of  the  apartments  and  offices  of  the  priory  are  still  in 
good  preservation,  and  the  tower  of  the  church,  crowned  with  a  stone  spire,  is  perfect. 
A  neat  modern  house  is  attached  to  the  ruins,  belonging  to  Mr.  Kynaston,  the  present 
proprietor  of  Caldey.  The  island  is  about  a  mile  in  length  and  half  a  mile  in  breadth, 
and  yields  by  its  various  produce  a  considerable  revenue.  It  contains  six  hundred  and 
eleven  acres  of  land,  two  hundred  of  which  are  inclosed,  and  in  tolerable  cultivation.  The 
rocks  are  chiefly  limestone,  which  furnishes  manure  for  the  land,  and  is  also  shipped  in 
large  quantities  to  the  opposite  coast.  The  island  abounds  with  rabbits,  which  form  the 
most  profitable  part  of  the  live  stock. 

On  the  north  side  of  Caldey  there  is  an  excellent  road  for  shipping,  sheltered  from 
the  south  and  west  winds,  which  are  generally  the  most  boisterous,  and  on  this  coast 
raise  the  heaviest  sea.  Two  hundred  vessels  may  ride  here,  with  each  (in  sea  phrase) 
a  clear  birth.  The  protection  afforded  by  this  little  island  is  of  peculiar  importance, 
for  the  harbour  of  Tenby  will  admit  but  few  vessels,  and  the  bars  at  the  mouths 

of 


86 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 


of  all  the  other  havens  in  Carmarthen  Bay  render  them,  in  bad  weather,  perfectly 
inaccessible. 

We  were  detained  at  Tenby  a  day  longer  than  we  desired  by  a  storm  of  wind  and 
rain :  the  gale  blew  from  the  south-west,  and  was  exceedingly  violent.  No  damage  was 
done  to  the  shipping  on  this  coast,  but  in  the  course  of  our  progress  we  saw  several  vessels 
that  had  been  wrecked  in  this  gale.  On  the  following  day  all  was  calm,  and  we  continued 
our  journey  on  foot,  intending,  after  our  observations  on  the  coast,  to  make  Pembroke 
our  quarters  for  the  night. 

The  most  southern  part  of  Pembrokeshire,  including  the  hundred  of  Castle  Martin, 
forms  a  peninsula,  bounded  on  two  sides  by  the  sea,  and  on  the  north  by  Milford  Haven. 
This  peninsula  bears  a  great  resemblance  to  that  of  Gower,  and  was  no  doubt  selected  as 
the  seat  of  a  foreign  colony  from  the  same  considerations.  Both  districts  are  equally  de- 
fended by  nature,  and  equally  well  situated  for  communication  with  England.  They  are 
alike  in  many  other  respects;  in  the  nature  of  their  soils,  in  the  nakedness  of  their  western 
parts,  and  in  the  ruggedness  and  grandeur  of  their  coasts.  As  both  were  inhabited  by 
the  same  people,  engaged  continually  in  the  same  kind  of  warfare,  their  general  history  is 
necessarily  very  much  alike,  and  in  both  of  them  castles  are  as  multitudinous  as  mile- 
stones. Lastly,  there  is  a  striking  resemblance  between  them  in  the  penuriousness  of 
their  accommodations  for  travellers,  and  it  was  this  point  of  similitude  which  obliged  us 
to  make  Pembroke  our  general  resting  place  during  our  survey  of  the  coast. 

The  first  object  that  attracted  our  notice  after  leaving  Tenby  was,  as  the  reader  may 
probably  suspect,  a  castle.  We  had  been  forewarned  that  such  an  object  would  be  in 
our  way,  at  the  distance  of  five  miles,  and  had  gone  forwards  with  no  great  degree  of 
enthusiasm,  in  the  expectation  of  seeing,  as  usual,  an  old  shattered  tower,  with,  perhaps, 
a  little  loose  lumber  scattered  about  it  in  the  last  stage  of  ruin.  In  this  expectation, 
however,  we  Avere  agreeably  deceived,  and  found  Manorbeer  by  far  the  most  extensive 
castle  that  AVC  had  hitherto  seen,  and,  except  St.  Donat's,  the  most  entire.  No  mention 
is  made  of  it  in  the  Welsh  Chronicle,  and  it  seems  by  some  singular  kind  of  favour  to 
have  escaped,  from  its  first  foundation  to  the  present  moment,  the  common  ravages  to 
which  all  other  castles  in  the  district  around  it  were  exposed.  The  general  design  of  it 
is  very  irregular,  but  the  style  of  architecture  is  uniform,  and  every  part  seems  to  be  of 
equal  antiquity.  It  is  situated  on  a  gentle  knoll,  in  a  narroAv  sandy  valley,  Avhich  at  the 
distance  of  about  forty  yards  from  the  walls  terminates  in  the  sea.  The  architecture  is 
remarkable  for  its  extreme  simplicity ;  there  are  no  ornamental  pillars,  fine  windows,  and 
elaborate  doorways :  strength  was  the  great  object  in  the  construction  of  the  castle,  and 
no  attempts  Avere  made  to  disguise  it. 

Giraldus  de  Barri,  the  great  prototype  of  all  Welsh  tourists,  was  born  at  Manorbeer, 
in  the  year  1146.  His  father  was  William  de  Barri,  a  Norman  of  high  rank,  and  his 
mother,  Angharad,  a  niece  of  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,  Prince  of  South  Wales.  Giraldus  de- 
plores 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  87 

plores  the  consequences  of  this  mixed  blood,  observing,  that  the  Welsh  hated  him  for  the 
sake  of  his  Norman  father,  and  the  English  for  that  of  his  Welsh  mother.  He- was  bred  to 
the  church,  and  after  having  completed  his  education,  prepared  the  way  for  his  prefer- 
ment by  paying  court  to  men  in  power.  He  began  his  career  as  the  Archbishop  of  Can- 
terbury's legate  in  Wales,  and  went  forth  with  the  rage  of  a  reformer,  excommunicating 
without  mercy  or  distinction  all  those  who  offended  against  the  strictest  ordinations  of  the 
church.  Though  a  young  man  at  this  period,  and  vain  of  his  own  personal  beauty,  he 
felt  himself  particularly  scandalized  by  the  incontinence  of  the  clergy,  called  all  their 
wives  concubines,  and  imperiously  insisted  upon  their  being  dismissed.  At  Brecknock, 
in  the  diocese  of  Saint  David's,  he  found  a  hoary  archdeacon  living  in  open  infamy  with 
his  wife,  and  not  being  able  to  shake  the  constancy  of  the  old  man  by  his  remonstrances, 
stripped  him  of  his  benefices,  and  delivered  them  up  to  his  superior.  After  this  act  of 
justice  he  returned  to  the  archbishop,  and  was  immediately  appointed  to  the  vacant  dig- 
nities of  the  uxorious  archdeacon.  In  his  new  office  he  persevered  in  the  same  rigorous 
system,  and  boasted  that  he  was  always  engaged  in  disputes,  and  that  justice  and  victory 
were  always  on  his  side.  One  of  these  engagements  sets  forth  the  tactics  of  religious 
warfare  in  so  comical  a  point  of  view,  that  I  cannot  forbear  from  quoting  the  account  of 
it.  Giraldus  received  intimation  that  Adam,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  was  coming  to  dedi- 
cate the  church  of  Keri,  over  which  he  had  no  lawful  authority,  and  that  if  no  obstacles 
intervened,  he  would  probably  take  possession  not  only  of  the  church,  but  of  the  whole 
province  to  which  it  appertained.  The  archdeacon  sprung  to  his  duty  like  a  lion,  dis- 
patched messengers  to  two  princes  of  the  country,  requesting  a  supply  of  men,  horses, 
and  arms,  and  hastened  with  his  forces  to  Keri.  Here  he  found  that  the  enemy  had  been 
at  work  before  him,  and  had  concealed  the  keys  of  the  church:  these,  however,  being 
recovered,  he  entered,  and  celebrated  mass  with  great  solemnity.  "  In  the  meantime 
messengers  arrived  from  the  bishop,  ordering  preparations  to  be  made  for  the  dedication 
of  the  church.  Mass  being  concluded,  the  archdeacon  sent  some  of  his  clergy,  attended 
by  the  dean  of  the  province,  to  inform  the  bishop,  '  That  if  he  came  to  Keri  as  a  neigh- 
bour and  a  friend  he  would  receive  him  with  every  mark  of  hospitality;  but  if  otherwise, 
he  desired  him  not  to  proceed.'  The  bishop  returned  for  answer,  '  That  he  was  coming 
in  his  professional  capacity  as  bishop  of  the  diocese,  to  perform  his  duty  in  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  church.'  The  archdeacon  and  his  clergy  met  the  bishop  at  the  entrance  of 
the  churchyard,  where  a  long  dispute  arose  about  the  matter  in  question,  and  each 
asserted  their  respective  rights  to  the  church  of  Keri.  To  enforce  his  claims  the  more, 
the  bishop  dismounted  from  his  horse,  placed  his  mitre  on  his  head,  and  taking  up  his 
pastoral  staffs,  walked  with  his  attendants  towards  the  church.  The  archdeacon  proceeded 
to  meet  him,  accompanied  by  his  clergy,  dressed  in  their  surplices  and  sacerdotal  robes, 
who,  with  lighted  tapers  and  upraised  crucifix,  came  forth  from  the  church  in  processional 
form:  at  length  each  began  to  excommunicate  the  other;  but  the  archdeacon  having 

ordered 


88  VOYAGE    HOUND    GRF.AT    BKITAIN. 

ordered  the  bells  to  be  rung  three  times,  as  the  usual  confirmation  of  the  sentence,  the 
bishop  and  his  train  mounted  their  horses,  and  made  a  precipitate  retreat,  followed  by  a 
great  mob,  and  pelted  with  clods  of  earth  and  stones." 

This  droll  rencounter  created  much  merriment  at  the  court  of  Henry  the  Second, 
but  it  procured  for  Giraldus  no  promotion  above  his  archdeaconry ;  for  in  consequence  of 
his  connexion  with  the  princes  and  chieftains  of  Wales,  the  king,  though  he  respected 
his  character  and  talents^  determined,  from  motives  of  rio  very  liberal  policy,  never  to 
appoint  him  to  any  high  authority  in  that  country.  He  made  him  preceptor  to  his 
son  John,  and  would  have  given  him  promotion  in  Ireland,  but  the  ambition  of  Giraldus 
was  to  be  satisfied  by  nothing  but  the  bishopric  of  St.  David's,  and  he  resolutely  rejected 
all  other  ecclesiastical  preferment.  After  the  death  of  Henry  he  was  nominated  by  the 
archdeacons  and  canons  of  St.  David's  to  his  favourite  see,  but  found  a  new  enemy  in 
Hubert,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  who  refused  to  accept  the  nomination.  Resistance 
from  the  see  of  Canterbury,  armed  with  whose  authority  he  had  first  signalized  his  zeal 
for  the  church,  must  have  been  a  severe  mortification  to  the  pride  of  Giraldus.  All  his 
spirit  seemed  to  sink  under  this  blow,  and  he  determined,  as  he  himself  declares,  no 
longer  to  sacrifice  his  peace  to  a  vain  ambition,  to  withdraw  from  the  worship  of  the 
court,  whose  cares  may  wound  but  can  never  satisfy  the  heart;  and  dedicate  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life  to  retirement  and  literature.  To  this  sensible  determination  he  adhered 
for  some  years,  but  his  ambition  had  another  spring.  On  returning,  after  a  long  absence, 
to  St.  David's,  he  found  the  clergy  still  warm  in  his  cause,  and  resolved,  at  their  instiga- 
tion, to  travel  to  Rome,  and  supplicate  the  interposition  of  the  pope.  He  was  urged  to 
this  step,  he  says,  not  only  by  an  earnestness  for  his  own  election,  but  by  a  general  feel- 
ing of  regard  for  the  interests  of  his  metropolitan  church,  and  a  desire  to  rescue  its  rights 
and  privileges  from  the  encroachments  of  the  see  of  Canterbury.  After  a  protracted  liti- 
gation of  five  anxious  years,  the  pope  pronounced  sentence  against  him,  and  put  a  final 
period  to  all  his  struggles  for  power.  He  passed  the  last  seventeen  years  of  his  life  in 
study  and  seclusion,  and  died  at  Saint  David's,  in  the  seventy-fourth  year  of  his  age. 

Giraldus  was  a  voluminous  author,  but  is  at  present  best  known  from  his  Itinerary 
through  Wales,  of  which  Sir  Richard  Colt  Hoare  lately  published  the  first  English  trans- 
lation. In  the  year  1187,  Baldwin,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  sent  into  Wales  by 
Henry  the  Second,  to  preach  the  crusade:  Giraldus  accompanied  him,  and  wrote  an  ac- 
count of  the  expedition,  combined  with  a  topographical  description  of  the  country,  and 
notices  on  its  history  and  antiquities.  Among  these  subjects  he  introduces  a  strange 
medley  of  idle  traditions  and  puerile  fictions,  which  he  seems  to  have  collected  with 
amazing  avidity  during  his  tour;  for  though  a  man  of  great  learning  and  ability,  he  agreed 
with  the  weakest  and  most  uninformed  in  all  the  superstitions  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived. 
His  fables  and  his  matters  of  fact  are  compounded  with  the  most  whimsical  gravity,  and 
he  tells  us  in  the  same  composed  tone  of  narration  of  a  castle  besieged,  and  of  a  woman, 

who 


VOYAGJi    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  89 

who  profanely  sitting  down  on  the  tomb  of  Saint  Osana,  found  herself  glued  to  her  seat, 
and  did  not  rise  without  leaving  her  petticoats,  &c.  behind  her.  His  boundless  credulity 
renders  his  authority  dubious  on  all  subjects  that  did  not  come  under  his  own  immediate 
observation;  but  his  topographical  descriptions  are  said  to  be  remarkably  correct,  and 
he  gives  much  valuable  information  relating  to  manners  and  customs. 

He  describes  Manorbeer,  his  native  place,  with  a  partiality  that  may  readily  be  for- 
given: after  marshalling  all  the  graces  of  its  surrounding  scenery,  its  beautiful  woods, 
orchards,  and  vineyards,  its  magnificent  fishpond,  broad  lake,  and  running  stream  of 
never-failing  water,  he  settles  its  pretensions  by  the  following  train  of  obvious  deduction. 
"  Demetia  (West  Wales),  therefore,  with  its  seven  cantreds,  is  the  most  beautiful  as  well 
as  the  most  powerful  district  of  Wales;  Pembroke  the  finest  province  of  Demetia,  and 
the  place  I  have  just  described  the  most  delightful  part  of  Pembroke.  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  that  Manor  Pirr  is  the  pleasantest  spot  in  Wales ;  and  the  author  may  be  par- 
doned for  having  thus  extolled  his  native  soil,  his  genial  territory,  with  a  profusion  of 
praise  and  admiration."  This  little  paradise  is  not  to  be  recognised  by  any  of  its  ancient 
features;  its  woods  have  fallen,  and  its  streams  have  ceased  to  flow,  and  nothing  is  now 
to  be  seen  but  a  cheerless,  naked  valley  of  sand. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  castle  of  Manorbeer  was  founded  by  the  father  of  Giraldus, 
William  de  Barri,  who  was  a  follower  of  Arnulph  de  Montgomery,  the  first  Norman  in- 
vader of  this  part  of  Wales.  Giraldus  himself  does  not  confirm  the  fact  by  his  authority, 
but  refers  us  back  to  a  far  more  distant  antiquity,  and  concludes  that  Maenor  Pirr  was 
the  mansion  of  Pyrrhus,  a  royal  scion  from  the  east,  who  reigned  in  Britain  at  a  period 
which  history  has  not  very  clearly  defined.  I  shall  not  proceed,  as  some  have  done, 
gravely  to  dispute  whether  it  is  probable  that  a  well-designed  and  well-finished  castle  of 
Norman  architecture  should  have  been  built  by  a  British  king  sometime  after  the  deluge, 
but  we  may  suppose  that  some  early  prince  or  chieftain  had  his  hut  here,  which  trans- 
ferred its  name  to  the  castle  afterwards  raised  by  the  Normans  on  the  same  ground. 
Whether  Pirr,  as  Giraldus  has  determined,  honestly  means  Pyrrhus,  I  am  not  prepared 
to  say,  and  as  a  mere  bald  fact,  it  is  of  very  little  importance  whether  it  was  Pyrrhus  out 
nullus.  The  etymology  of  the  present  title  of  Manorbeer,  according  to  vulgar  tradition,  is 
this :  a  knight  of  the  castle  was  engaged  in  single  combat  with  a  bear  that  had  long  been 
the  terror  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  the  fight  was  so  desperately  and  equally  contested, 
that  it  was  long  doubtful  which  would  fall,  Man  or  Bear.  Had  this  story  been  extant  in 
the  time  of  Giraldus,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  he  would  have  preferred  it  to  Pyrrhus. 

We  walked  for  some  miles  to  the  westward  of  Manorbeer  without  seeing  any  thing 
remarkable  on  the  coast,  and  with  a  naked  and  dreary  country  on  our  right,  till  we 
arrived  at  Stackpool  Court,  the  seat  of  Lord  Cawdor,  which,  like  Penrice  in  Gower,  has 
by  severe  and  skilful  discipline  been  forced  into  cultivation,  and  forms  a  little  spot  of 
verdure  in  a  circle  of  barrenness.  The  grounds  are  in  a  deep  and  sheltered  valley, 

abundantly 


90  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

abundantly  clothed  with  wood,  and  laid  out  in  every  respect  with  excellent  taste.  There 
are  a  park  well  stocked  with  deer,  gardens,  shrubberies,  and  all  the  formal  embellishments 
of  a  gentleman's  seat,  which  it  may  be  allowed  me  to  particularize,  for  in  this  discordant 
climate  they  appear  in  the  character  of  curiosities.  Immediately  to  the  southward  of  the 
park  you  enter  again  upon  a  region  of  nakedness,  a  vast  tract  of  sandhills,  tenanted  by 
rabbits.  The  mansion  of  Stackpool  is  large,  but  its  architecture  is  heavy  and  inelegant. 
It  was  built  by  the  grandfather  of  Lord  Cawdor,  who  was  son  of  Sir  Alexander  Campbell 
of  Cawdor  Castle,  in  Scotland  :  Sir  Alexander  was  the  first  of  the  name  who  settled  here, 
and  came  into  possession  of  the  Stackpool  estates  by  marriage.  There  was  formerly  a 
castle  on  the  site  of  the  present  building,  which  in  the  civil  wars  was  garrisoned  for  the 
king;  and  in  an  account  of  the  siege  by  the  forces  of  parliament,  it  is  said,  that  the 
walls  were  so  strong  that  the  ordnance  made  but  little  impression  upon  them.  The  castle 
was  no  doubt  built  by  the  Normans:  the  first  possessor  of  whom  there  is  any  mention 
was  Sir  Elidore  de  Stackpool,  Avho  lived  in  the  twelfth  century.  Nothing  is  known  of  this 
knight  but  what  is  told  by  Giraldus,  who  was  his  contemporary,  and  he  simply  relates  of 
him  that  he  was  once  a  little  imposed  upon  by  a  demon,  a  red-haired  youth,  calling 
himself  Simon.  This  devil,  however,  was  of  a  very  civil  and  obliging  disposition;  he 
seized  upon  the  keys  of  the  house-steward  rather  abruptly,  and  insisted  upon  performing 
his  office,  but  then  he  performed  it  so  skilfully  and  conscientiously,  that  there  was  no  very 
fair  ground  for  complaint.  He  knew  intuitively  the  dishes  that  were  most  agreeable  to 
the  palates  of  his  master  and  mistress,  and  took  care  that  they  should  always  be  upon 
the  table,  and  he  at  the  same  time  regaled  the  domestics  with  some  choice  bits,  for  it  was 
his  opinion  that  those  Avho  worked  hard  should  be  well  fed.  After  holding  his  situation 
for  forty  days  he  was  discharged,  and  delivered  up  his  keys  very  peaceably.  Being  re- 
quested to  give  some  account  of  himself  before  his  departure,  he  confessed  that  he  was 
begotten  by  a  demon  upon  the  wife  of  a  rustic  in  the  parish:  there  was  some  reason  to 
question  the  truth  of  this  statement,  resting  thus  upon  the  testimony  of  only  one  person 
concerned;  but  all  doubts  were  soon  cleared  up,  for  the  woman  herself  very  candidly 
avowed  the  fact. 

It  does  not  appear  that  the  castle  was  ever  engaged  in  any  military  service  before  the 
reign  of  Charles  the  First ;  I  shall  therefore  forbear  to  trace  its  history  and  the  names  of 
its  possessors  after  the  time  of  Sir  Elidore. 

A  small  stream,  which  has  its  source  a  little  to  the  northward  of  Stackpool,  flows 
through  the  grounds,  and  falls  into  the  sea  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile  from  the  house, 
forming  a  little  port,  called  Broad  Haven.  The  water  is  very  ornamental  to  the  grounds, 
but  is  so  obstructed  by  sand  that  it  affords  a  harbour  only  to  small  craft.  We  made  this 
creek  the  limit  of  our  this  day's  observations,  and  turning  to  the  northward  proceeded  to 
Pembroke.  We  here  found  a  very  comfortable  inn  and  a  very  communicative  landlord, 
who,  when  he  had  ascertained  the  cause  of  our  visit  to  his  house,  and  the  nature  of  our 

future 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    URITA1X.  91 

future  intentions,  declared  that  we  were  in  high  luck,  for  that  the  first  objects  we  should 
see  on  the  coast  in  our  excursion  of  the  next  day,  were  those  which  thousands  had  tra- 
velled from  the  remotest  parts  of  the  principality  to  see  and  to  worship.  These  objects, 
he  informed  us,  and  he  looked  miracles  as  he  spoke,  were  St.  Gowan's  Chapel  and  a  holy 
well,  whose  waters  are  a  sovereign  remedy  for  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  sickness  or  sorrow. 
With  this  cordial  prospect  before  us  we  started  in  the  morning,  under  the  conduct  of  a 
guide,  who,  during  our  journey  to  the  sacred  spot,  endeavoured  with  all  his  eloquence  to 
quicken  our  faith.  On  arriving  at  the  brink  of  the  cliff,  we  descended  by  a  few  stone 
steps,  and  found  ourselves  surrounded  by  a  scene  of  rudeness  and  grandeur  which,  con- 
versant as  we  were  with  rocks,  we  had  never  seen  surpassed.  The  cliffs  on  each  side  of 
us  presented  a  vast  front,  broken  into  every  possible  variety  of  rude  forms ;  near  their 
summits  were  large  masses  of  overhanging  rock,  some  of  which  seemed  to  be  so  doubtfully 
supported,  and  had  so  enormous  a  bulk  hanging  in  the  air,  that  it  was  impossible  to  look 
at  them  without  stepping  back  and  preparing  for  their  fall.  One  might  have  fancied  that 
the  coast  had  been  shattered  by  a  recent  earthquake,  which  had  left  the  rocks  still  un- 
settled and  vibrating  with  the  shock.  Beneath  us  lay  a  confused  heap  of  fragments, 
which  had  been  torn  down  from  the  cliffs ;  and  the  sea,  rolling  on  to  the  shore  with  a 
deep  swell,  was  raging  and  roaring  amongst  them.  In  the  midst  of  this  wild  solitude 
stands  the  chapel  of  the  saint,  and  superstition  could  scarcely  have  chosen  for  herself  a 
more  appropriate  throne.  A  steep  and  narrow  path  leads  down  to  the  sanctuary,  but 
the  descent  is  facilitated  by  a  flight  of  steps  cut  in  the  rocks ;  fifty-two  steps  a  man 
would  say  who  went  boring  to  work  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  calculation,  but  it  is  very 
well  known  in  these  parts,  that  you  might  as  well  attempt  to  count  the  grains  of  sand  on 
the  sea-shore  as  to  tell  the  number  of  these  mystic  steps.  The  chapel  stands  across  the 
pass  about  midway  down  the  cliff:  it  is  a  rude  building  of  stone,  twenty  feet  in  length 
and  twelve  in  breadth ;  and  had  it  not  been  for  a  bell  hung  under  an  open  arch  at  one 
end  of  the  roof,  one  might  have  mistaken  it  for  a  fisherman's  hut.  Of  the  date  or  occasion 
of  its  foundation  nothing  is  known. 

Our  guide,  anxious  to  witness  the  full  confirmation  of  our  faith,  accompanied  us  into 
the  interior,  where  we  beheld,  suspended  from  the  walls,  several  crutches,  which  had  sup- 
ported the  crippled  and  credulous  to  the  well,  and  which  were  hung  up  here  in  testimony 
of  their  cure,  and  as  offerings  of  gratitude  to  their  gracious  deliverer.  With  this  strong 
hold  upon  our  minds,  our  guide  ventured  to  bring  our  belief  to  new  trials,  and  leading  us 
to  a  small  doorway  in  the  east  wall  of  the  chapel,  pointed  out  a  circular  cavity  in  the 
rock,  large  enough  to  hold  the  body  of  a  man.  Into  this  we  were  to  creep,  and  then  to 
form  what  wishes  were  most  agreeable  to  ourselves,  which  were  certainly  to  be  granted, 
providing  that  they  did  not  prove  disagreeable  to  the  saint.  This  little  cell  was  formed 
by  a  miracle ;  the  saint  was  once  pursued  by  some  barbarous  pagans,  and  was  running 

if  Avildlj 


92  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

wildly  about  his  cave,  not  knowing  whither  to  turn  for  safety,  when  the  rocks  suddenly 
opened  to  receive  him,  and  thus  preserved  his  valuable  life. 

A  few  more  steps  lead  from  the  chapel  down  to  the  well,  and  as  we  were  descending, 
we  met  a  miserable,  emaciated  girl,  who  was  toiling  up  with  the  utmost  difficulty  and 
pain,  and  bending  under  the  load  of  a  large  pitcher  of  water,  which  she  told  us  she  was 
going  to  drink.  She  had  been  in  ill  health  for  many  years,  and  had  formerly  drunk  the 
water  with  strict  regularity  during  twelve  months,  but  growing  worse,  had  applied  to  the 
doctor,  who  declared,  after  a  long  trial,  that  he  could  give  her  no  relief,  and  she  had  now 
returned  again,  as  her  last  refuge,  to  Saint  Gowan.  The  failure  of  the  doctor  had 
awakened  all  her  confidence  in  the  saint,  and  she  was  only  fearful  that  he  might  be 
offended  at  her  former  impatience.  As  we  were  ascending  from  the  well,  we  perceived 
another  votary  who  had  hitherto  escaped  our  observation,  a  poor  lad  perched  upon  a  rock, 
with  paper  and  pencil  in  his  hands,  and  his  eyes  devoutly  fixed  upon  the  chapel.  He  too 
was  suffering  from  disease,  and  had  been  long  drinking  the  charmed  water  with  no  benefit 
to  his  health,  and  Avith  no  injury  to  his  faith:  he  was  too  feeble  to  work,  and  spent  much 
of  his  time  among  these  solitary  rocks,  amusing  himself  with  his  pencil,  which  he  had 
never  been  instructed  to  use,  but  which  he  hoped  would  one  da}7  enable  him  to  take  a 
faithful  likeness  of  the  steps,  the  chapel,  and  the  well.  These  poor  people  seemed  to  be 
utterly  ignorant  of  all  particulars  relating  to  the  birth  and  history  of  Saint  Gowan,  and 
delivered  themselves  up  to  his  keeping  without  troubling  themselves  about  his  credentials. 
My  own  enquiries  on  this  subject  (and  my  wishes  in  the  wall  may  be  supposed  to  have 
made  me  enquire  with  some  earnestness,)  have  not  led  to  any  satisfactory  conclusions. 
There  seems  to  be  a  doubt  whether  he  was  a  thorough-bred  saint  imported  from  Ireland 
in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  or  Sir  Gawaine,  the  nephew  of  king  Arthur,  and  a  model 
of  valour  and  courtesy,  canonized  after  his  death  by  an  error  of  the  vulgar.  In  either 
case  nothing  is  known  of  his  adventures  in  connexion  with  this  rude  spot,  and  whether  he 
lived  or  died  here  it  may  never  be  permitted  us  to  know. 

In  our  progress  to  the  westward  of  Saint  Gowan's,  we  had  to  pause  almost  at  every 
step  to  gaze  at  some  new  wonder  in  the  forms  of  the  rocks.  The  coast,  like  that  of  Gower, 
is  composed  entirely  of  limestone,  and  has  suffered  even  more  from  the  battering  of  the 
sea,  exhibiting  such  a  strange  confusion  of  rocks,  twisted  and  torn  into  such  multiplied 
and  fantastic  configurations,  that  I  despair  of  giving  any  idea  of  the  complicated  scene  by 
description.  The  whole  is  on  a  scale  of  exceeding  grandeur,  and  while  we  were  marking 
the  changes  of  the  rocks,  and  examining  them  in  all  their  detail,  we  were  as  much  struck 
with  their  vastness  as  with  their  variety.  At  a  short  distance  from  Saint  Gowan's  we 
came  to  a  fissure  in  the  cliffs,  called  Adam's  Leap,  extending  from  the  summit  to  the  sea, 
a  depth  of  full  two  hundred  feet :  a  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Adam  is  said,  when  follow- 
ing the  hounds,  to  have  galloped  unawares  to  the  brink  of  this  terrible  gulf,  and,  unable  to 

check 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  93 

check  or  turn  his  horse,  to  have  been  carried  over  it.  The  story  gives  a  superadded  horror 
to  the  place,  and  may  very  well  be  credited  by  a  passing  traveller;  but  I  confess,  now  that 
my  judgment  is  cool  and  my  knees  steady,  that  I  think  it  extremely  suspicious:  we  may 
admit  that  the  gap  may  be  wider  at  present  than  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and 
thus  become  reconciled  to  the  powers  of  the  horse;  but  it  is  very  improbable  that  the  man, 
a  resident  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  of  course  well  acquainted  with  the  general  character 
of  the  coast,  should  have  selected  this  particular  line  of  pursuit,  when  there  was  a  safe 
and  even  course  for  him  a  few  hundred  yards  further  from  the  sea.  His  horse  to  be  sure 
may  have  run  away  with  him;  but  then  we  are  called  upon  to  make  the  same  allowance 
for  the  conduct  of  another  desperate  sportsman,  named  Penny,  who  flew  over  the  gulf  on 
the  same  occasion. 

The  cliffs  are  intersected  by  numerous  clefts  and  chasms  which  all  seem  to  have  been 
formed  by  the  same  means,  the  excavation  of  subterraneous  passages  by  the  sea,  and  the 
subsidence  of  the  rocks  above  them.  The  rise  of  the  tide  above  the  base  of  the  cliffs  is 
eighteen  or  twenty  feet,  and  in  gales  of  wind  blowing  on  to  the  shore  every  wave  rises  at 
least  twenty  feet  above  the  ordinary  level,  so  that  a  cavern  of  forty  feet  in  height  may  be 
made  by  the  sea.  This  system  of  sapping  directed  against  the  foundations  of  rocks,  par- 
ticularly subject  from  the  nature  of  their  composition  and  their  modes  of  stratification  to 
sink  and  give  way,  is  sufficient  to  account  for  all  these  chasms,  though  some  of  them  are  so 
vast  that  one  might  have  supposed  it  would  have  required  a  more  than  common  convul- 
sion of  nature  for  their  production.  They  are  generally  broad  at  their  entrance  near  the 
sea,  and  become  gradually  narrower  as  thejr  recede  from  it,  till  they  close  in  a  point.  We 
observed  one,  however,  in  which  this  order  was  inverted,  the  widest  part  being  farthest 
inland,  with  the  sides  converging  till  they  met  at  the  very  edge  of  the  cliff,  near  the  sum- 
mit, leaving  a  shallow  gap  above,  and  a  long  narrow  fissure  below,  not  more  than  two 
yards  in  width,  but  spreading  near  the  base  into  a  larger  opening,  through  which  the  sea 
burst  with  prodigious  fury.  The  little  streak  of  light  at  the  extremity  of  this  long,  deep, 
and  gloomy  passage  had  a  very  singular  effect.  Not  far  from  this  chasm  is  Bosherston 
Meer,  a  curious  cavity  at  the  distance  of  about  a  hundred  yards  from  the  edge  of  the 
cliffs,  and  resembling  a  well  or  a  coal-pit.  The  circumference  at  the  mouth  is  small,  but 
the  duct  widens  downwards,  retaining  its  circular  form  to  a  great  depth,  when  it  leads  by 
a  winding  passage  to  the  shore.  In  gales  of  wind  the  sea  is  said  to  be  forced  up  this  duct 
with  amazing  violence,  and  to  rise  in  a  pillar  of  foam  thirty  or  forty  feet  above  the  mouth, 
and  with  a  roar  that  may  be  heard  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  the  spot.  We  observed 
many  pits  of  this  kind  in  this  neighbourhood  of  various  dimensions,  but  all  of  the  same 
general  character,  and  all  communicating  with  the  sea. 

The  next  wonder  was  the  Castles,  two  huge  masses  of  rock  detached  from  the  land, 
which  were  covered  with  sea  fowl,  all  crowded  together,  fighting  and  scuffling  for  places, 
as  numerous  and  as  full  of  motion  as  a  swarm  of  bees.  Their  day  of  migration  was  at 

hand, 


94  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

hand,  and  the  whole  flock  seemed  to  be  full  of  impatience,  and  agitated  by  all  the  hurry 
and  bustle  of  preparation.  The  two  rocks  are  supposed  to  bear  some  resemblance  to 
castles,  from  the  steepness  of  their  sides  and  the  formality  of  their  strata,  though  in  this 
respect  they  are  not  so  remarkable  as  the  main  cliff  immediately  opposite  to  them,  which 
is  as  perpendicular  as  a  wall,  with  regular  courses  of  rock  disposed  at  equal  distances 
from  top  to  bottom,  exactly  like  artificial  masonry,  and  on  a  most  magnificent  scale,  for  the 
cliff  is  nearly  two  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  each  course  of  rock  full  fifteen  feet  in  thick- 
ness. The  manner  in  which  these  piles  of  rock,  like  the  Castles,  are  disunited,  is  plainly  in- 
dicated :  almost  every  projecting  point  of  land  has  an  excavation  worn  completely  through 
it,  and  some  have  two  or  three;  in  process  of  time  the  layer  of  rocks  above  the  excavation 
gives  way,  and  leaves  the  extremity  of  the  point  detached.  A  little  to  the  westward  of 
the  Castles  there  is  a  projecting  cliff  with  an  arch  through  it,  of  such  immense  breadth 
and  height  that  the  whole  promontory  looks  like  a  bridge,  but  preserving  all  the  bold  irre- 
gularity of  nature  in  her  rudest  works.  Farther  on  is  the  Eligug  Stack,  another  insulated 
rock,  much  more  singular  in  its  form  than  either  of  the  Castles.  It  rises  in  a  lofty  and 
rugged  column,  about  a  hundred  feet  in  height,  leaning  considerably  to  seaward,  very 
slender  in  the  middle,  and  with  a  huge  top  which  overhangs  the  base.  Nothing  could  be 
more  strange  than  the  appearance  of  this  vast  body,  thus  upheld  in  a  posture  which  one 
should  not  have  supposed  it  possible  for  it  to  have  maintained  but  for  an  instant,  and  in 
the  very  act  of  falling.  The  strata  of  this  stack  are  all  horizontal,  but  those  of  the  main 
cliffs  are  very  remarkable  for  the  variety  of  their  position,  and  their  confused  intermixture. 
The  cliff  immediately  opposite  to  the  stack  juts  out  into  a  considerable  projection,  and  at 
its  extremity  (as  represented  in  the  plate  of  the  Eligug  Stack,)  there  is  for  the  space  of 
about  thirty  feet  a  range  of  nearly  vertical  strata,  with  those  on  each  side  completely  at 
right  angles.  In  the  disjointed  fragments  at  the  base  of  the  point  they  rise  and  dip  in 
various  directions,  which  may  be  accounted  for  from  the  manner  in  which  the  rocks  have 
fallen;  but  I  am  not  sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  subject  to  hazard  a  conjecture  upon 
the  nature  of  the  convulsion,  which  could  have  acted  with  such  power,  yet  with  such  par- 
tiHl  operation,  on  the  solid  body  of  the  cliff.  To  the  westward  of  this  point  the  coast  re- 
cedes into  a  small  bay,  where  the  strata  exhibit  a  new  variety,  rising  and  falling  in  gentle 
undulations  along  the  whole  front  of  the  cliffs:  beyond  the  bay  they  resume  their  hori- 
zontal position,  but  along  the  remainder  of  this  coast  are  at  intervals  again  thrown  into 
disorder. 

At  the  Head  of  Man,  a  lofty  promontory,  they  appear,  as  in  the  cliffs  near  the 
Castles,  in  a  regular  succession  of  equal  courses,  which  look  just  like  the  work  of  art;  and 
the  resemblance  is  perhaps  more  striking  here,  as  the  courses  are  of  less  enormous  thick- 
ness. The  name  of  this  promontory  seems  to  be  pregnant  with  meaning,  but  we  could 
not  discover  the  propriety  of  its  application;  nor  could  our  guide,  though  in  his  train  of 
reasoning  on  the  subject  he  deduced  numerous  and  very  opposite  conclusions,  give  us  any 

satisfactory 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  95 

satisfactory  information.  On  arriving  at  Linney  Head,  another  bold  promontory,  we 
found  ourselves  nearly  satiated  with  the  sight  of  rocks,  and  felt  that  our  curiosity  was 
rapidly  giving  way,  and  our  legs  too,  for  though  the  distance  between  Saint  Gowan's  and 
Linney  is  computed  not  to  be  more  than  five  miles,  yet,  by  following  the  indented  edge  of 
the  cliffs,  we  had  employed  almost  the  whole  day  in  going  over  it.  It  had  been  our  wish 
to  have  proceeded  along  this  coast  by  sea,  but  there  is  usually  so  heavy  a  swell,  the  tides 
are  so  rapid,  and  the  ground  is  so  studded  with  rocks,  that  a  boat  cannot  approach  the 
shore  with  any  degree  of  safety. 

From  Linney  Head  we  had  a  complete  view  of  the  coast,  forming  a  deep  bay,  to  the 
extremity  of  the  peninsula,  and  seeing  that  it  was  of  the  same  character  as  that  which,  at 
so  great  an  expense  of  time  and  toil,  we  had  just  passed,  we  declined  any  minuter  survey 
of  it,  and  returned  to  Pembroke. 

The  whole  of  the  inland  country  near  the  western  extremity  of  the  peninsula  is  bleak 
and  naked,  and  offers  nothing  worthy  of  remark  in  the  little  villages  with  which  it  is 
sparingly  chequered,  unless  I  mention  the  churches,  which  have  all  steeples,  a  species  of 
church  ornament  extremely  rare  in  all  parts  of  Wales,  except  in  those  formerly  occupied  by 
the  Normans,  Flemings,  and  English.  The  churches  are  said,  now  that  all  other  distinc- 
tions are  wearing  away,  to  be  an  excellent  criterion  for  forming  a  line  of  demarcation  be- 
tween the  native  Welsh  and  the  foreign  settlers  in  their  country,  though  the  castles  render 
such  a  criterion  almost  superfluous.  The  Welsh  at  the  time  of  the  first  invasion  of  Wales 
by  the  Normans  had  no  knowledge  of  architecture  beyond  its  simplest  elements,  and 
though  they  soon  acquired  great  facility  in  destroying  castles,  yet  they  did  not  so  readily 
learn  the  art  of  building  them  :  probably  they  were  not  willing  ab  hoste  doceri,  or  may 
have  been  so  continually  engaged  in  making  attacks  that  they  had  little  time  or  oppor- 
tunity to  attend  to  any  system  of  defence.  Their  religious  architecture  was  as  inartificial 
as  their  military,  and  seems  to  have  survived  to  the  present  day  without  alteration  or  im- 
provement. The  churches  in  Gower,  Castle  Martin,  and  other  districts  inhabited  by  the 
foreign  settlers,  are  in  no  respect  superior  to  the  plainest  village  churches  which  we  see  in 
every  county  of  England,  but  they  are  perfectly  magnificent  compared  with  the  mean 
hovels,  called  churches,  in  other  parts  of  Wales.  One  might  have  expected  that  national 
pride  would  have  risen  up  in  steeples  all  over  the  country,  and  have  removed  this  invidious 
distinction  long  ago,  but  it  has  remained  unaccountably  lethargic  on  this  subject,  in  spite 
of  the  taunts  of  tourists  without  number. 

The  only  object  in  Pembroke  that  requires  the  notice  of  a  traveller  is  its  castle,  which 
is  said  to  be  the  finest  relic  of  antiquity  in  Wales.  The  town,  though  the  county  town, 
has  the  appearance  of  little  more  than  a  country  village,  dull  and  silent,  without  bustle  or 
business  of  any  kind.  It  was  formerly  of  more  consideration,  and  had  some  little  commerce, 
but  this  has  been  transferred  to  Haverfordwest,  which  is  now  regarded  as  the  capital  of 
the  county.  The  town  consists  of  only  one  street,  situated  on  a  narrow  ridge  of  land, 

which 


96  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

which  is  bounded  on  the  north  and  south  sides  by  branches  of  Milford  Haven :  the  ridge 
rises  considerably  towards  its  extremity,  and  terminates  in  a  steep  and  rugged  rock,  on 
which  stands  the  majestic  castle.  The  natural  advantages  of  its  situation  pointed  it  out 
to  the  Normans  as  excellently  calculated  for  a  military  post,  and  they  employed  all  the 
powers  of  art  to  improve  its  strength.  It  was  encompassed  by  a  wall,  which  on  the  north 
side  is  still  remaining,  and  is  very  lofty,  and  flanked  with  numerous  bastions  of  immense 
thickness:  there  are  some  remains  of  the  wall  on  the  south  side,  but  the  greater  part  has 
given  way  to  modern  buildings.  The  most  advantageous  view  of  the  castle  is  from  the 
water,  from  whence  you  see  the  solid  basement  of  naked  rock  on  which  it  stands,  and 
which  adds  very  materially  to  the  commanding  dignity  of  its  appearance.  It  was  divided 
into  an  inner  and  outer  ward,  the  former  including  the  keep  and  the  state  apartments,  and 
the  latter  the  barracks  for  the  garrison  and  other  subordinate  offices.  The  architecture  is 
Norman  with  a  mixture  of  early  Gothic.  The  most  imposing  object  is  the  keep,  which 
stands  in  the  centre  of  the  whole  range  of  buildings,  and  rises  far  above  every  other  part. 
The  height  of  this  tower  is  seventy-five  feet,  and  its  circumference  at  the  base  a  hundred 
and  sixty-three  feet  seven  inches:  it  diminishes  by  a  very  gentle  gradation  towards  the 
summit,  and  is  covered  with  a  vaulted  roof.  The  walls  are  fourteen  feet  in  thickness. 
This  noble  structure  is  entire,  and  seems  formed  to  last  as  long  as  the  rock  on  which  it 
stands. 

The  castle  was  garrisoned  in  the  civil  wars  for  the  king,  under  the  command  of 
Colonel  Poyer,  who  from  some  private  pique  had  turned  traitor  to  the  cause  of  the  parlia- 
ment. Cromwell  appeared  before  Pembroke  on  the  21st  of  May,  1648,  with  a  large  force, 
but  found  its  reduction  much  more  difficult  than  he  had  expected.  He  was  very  ill  sup- 
plied with  ammunition,  and  was  ultimately  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  using  round  stones 
for  balls.  The  besieged  were  in  a  still  more  exhausted  state,  being  almost  without  provi- 
sions, yet  they  defended  themselves  with  the  utmost  bravery  and  resolution.  Means, 
however,  were  at  length  found  of  cutting  off  their  supplies  of  water,  and  they  then  sur- 
rendered at  discretion.  Poyer  was  afterwards  executed  in  Covent  Garden;  and  is  said  to 
have  died  very  penitently.  The  castle  was  founded  by  Arnulph  de  Montgomery  about 
the  year  1090,  and  soon  afterwards  was  attacked  by  the  Welsh  with  a  very  large  force, 
but  without  success.  Arnulph  being  disgraced  and  banished  for  rebellion  in  the  year  1102, 
Gerald  de  Windesor,  who  had  acted  as  his  lieutenant  in  the  castle,  was  appointed  to  suc- 
ceed him  as  governor ;  and  soon  after  the  acquisition  of  his  new  dignity,  was  surprised  in 
his  hold  by  a  stratagem,  which,  together  with  its  chain  of  consequences,  gives  a  very  lively 
picture  of  that  wild  and  savage  anarchy  which  for  many  centuries  distracted  the  whole 
country  of  Wales.  Gerald  had  married  Nesta,  sister  of  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,  and  a  lady  of 
extraordinary  beauty  and  accomplishments.  The  fame  of  her  charms  spread  wide  over 
the  country,  and  reached  the  ears  of  Owen,  son  of  Cadogan  ap  Bleddyn,  a  chieftain  of 
Powys,  who  became  so  inflamed  with  the  report  that  he  determined  to  see  her.  Under 

pretence 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BUITAIN.  97 

pretence  of  paying  a  friendly  visit  he  gained  access  to  her,  and  finding  that  her  beauty 
even  transcended  her  fame,  resolved  to  possess  her.  With  this  view  he  collected  a  party 
of  lawless  and  ruffian  companions,  entered  the  castle  privately  by  night,  and  not  knowing, 
I  suppose,  the  precise  apartment  where  his  mistress  slept,  conceived  that  the  shortest  plan 
would  be  to  burn  her  out,  and  therefore  set  fire  to  the  building,  and  waited  the  event- 
Amidst  the  fire  and  smoke  Gerald  awoke;  and,  in  the  first  hurried  impulse  of  the  moment, 
would  have  rushed  from  the  room ;  but  Nesta,  suspecting  treason,  detained  him,  and  im- 
plored him  to  make  his  escape  by  a  private  passage.  When  he  was  in  safety,  she  went  to 
her  chamber  door,  and  called  out  that  she  and  her  children  were  alone.  Owen  burst  in, 
and  thinking  that  the  murder  of  the  husband,  if  not  a  title  to  the  affections,  would  at  least 
be  a  security  for  the  person  of  the  wife,  made  a  diligent  search  for  Gerald,  but  without 
discovering  the  passage  through  which  he  had  retreated.  At  length,  giving  up  the  pursuit 
as  hopeless,  he  seized  upon  Nesta  and  her  children,  and  filling  up  the  measure  of  his 
amusement  by  ravaging  the  whole  country  as  he  passed,  reached  Powys  in  safety. 
Cadogan,  when  he  heard  of  this  adventure,  dreaded  the  resentment  of  the  King  of  Eng- 
land, Henry  the  First,  for  this  outrage  against  one  of  his  officers,  and  represented  to  Owen 
the  necessity  of  immediately  restoring  to  Gerald  his  wife  and  children ;  but  he  would  by 
no  means  consent  to  lose  the  lady,  though  at  her  request  he  delivered  up  the  children. 
Richard,  Bishop  of  London,  was  at  this  time  Warden  of  the  Marches;  and  hearing  of  this 
indignity  offered  to  the  authority  of  the  king,  instantly  prepared  to  avenge  it,  and  bribed 
Ithel  and  Madoc,  sons  of  Rhiryd  ap  Bleddyn,  and  cousins  to  Owen,  with  some  others,  by 
promises  of  splendid  remuneration,  to  pursue  the  offender,  and  either  kill  or  take  him. 
They  all  very  cheerfully  engaged  in  the  service;  pledged  themselves  to  bring  both  Owen 
and  his  father  to  the  bishop,  either  dead  or  alive,  and  "  thereupon  forthwith  gathered  their 
power  to  destroy  the  whole  country."  They  did  not,  however,  exactly  agree  upon  the 
mode  and  time  of  attack,  and  while  they  were  disputing  among  themselves  whether  it 
would  be  best  to  make  it  in  open  day,  or  under  the  concealment  of  night,  Cadogan  and 
Owen  escaped  and  fled  to  sea.  Nothing  remained  to  them  in  this  extremity  but  to  Jay 
waste  the  country,  which  they  did  very  effectually,  and  then  retired  to  their  homes.  In 
the  meantime  Owen  repaired  to  Ireland,  where  he  was  well  received  :  Cadogan  returned 
to  Wales,  and  sending  messengers  to  the  king,  proved  very  satisfactorily  that  so  far  from 
bearing  any  share  in  the  crime  of  his  son,  he  had  exerted  all  his  authority  to  compel  him 
to  make  atonement,  and  was  graciously  pardoned  on  his  paying  a  fine  of  one  hundred 
pounds.  In  the  course  of  a  year  Owen  also  appeared  again  in  Wales,  and  would  willingly 
have  been  pardoned,  but  could  induce  no  one  to  intercede  for  him.  He,  however,  soon 
found  a  friend  where  he  had  least  reason  to  expect  one:  his  relation,  Madoc,  who  had  so 
lately  plotted  against  his  life,  had  now  quarrelled  with  his  employer,  the  bishop,  and  there- 
fore sent  to  Owen,  desiring  a  reconciliation.  This  was  speedily  adjusted,  and  followed  by 
a  league  of  friendship,  each  solemnly  swearing  to  be  true  and  faithful  to  the  other.  Under 

this 


98  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

this  monstrous  engagement  they  immediately  prepared  for  action,  and  as  the  historian  ex- 
presses it,  "  burned  and  spoiled  the  lands  of  such  as  they  loved  not,  and  destroyed  all 
things  that  they  met  withal."  After  their  predatory  incursions  they  usually  retreated  for 
safety  to  the  estate  of  their  uncle,  Torwerth,  who  fearing  that  he  might  incur  the  dis- 
pleasure of  the  king  by  affording  them  shelter,  implored  them  to  choose  another  place  of 
meeting;  whereupon,  as  indeed  he  might  have  expected,  "they  used  his  country  more 
often  than  they  were  wont."  They  occasionally  visited  Cadogan,  who  remonstrated  with 
as  little  effect,  and  who  very  soon  forfeited  his  estates  to  the  king  because  he  had  it  not 
in  his  power  to  check  their  enormities.  On  this  event  Madoc  and  Owen  fled  to  Ireland  > 
from  whence  Madoc  soon  returned  alone,  and  commenced  a  new  system  of  iniquity 
entirely  on  his  own  account.  When  he  arrived  in  Wales  he  repaired  to  the  country  of  his 
uncle,  lorwerth,  who  now  more  than  ever  alarmed  at  his  appearance,  in  consequence  of 
the  fate  of  Cadogan,  issued  a  proclamation  commanding  all  his  dependants  to  drive  him 
from  them  as  an  enemy.  Bitterly  incensed  at  this  "  unkindness  and  discourtesy,"  Madoc 
drew  together  a  party  of  outlaws  and  vagabonds,  and  attacked  his  uncle  in  his  house  at 
midnight.  lorwerth  awoke,  and  defended  himself  with  intrepidity,  until  his  house  was  set 
fire  to  and  there  was  no  hope  left,  when  preferring  death  by  the  sword  to  the  slow  torment 
of  being  burned,  he  came  forth,  but  his  foes  received  him  upon  their  spears,  and  cast  him 
back  into  the  flames.  When  King  Henry  heard  of  this  outrage  he  appeared  to  be  a  little 
ashamed  of  his  severity  towards  Cadogan,  and  appointed  him  to  his  brother's  estates  (his  own 
were  irreversibly  alienated),  promising  at  the  same  time  to  pardon  his  son  Owen.  Madoc 
was  by  no  means  satisfied  with  this  arrangement,  and  not  expecting  to  find  a  better  friend 
in  Cadogan  than  in  lorwerth,  destroyed  him  also.  After  this  act  he  sent  straight  to  the 
Bishop  of  London,  begging  him  to  remember  what  was  due  to  him  for  having  formerly 
chased  Owen  from  the  land ;  and  the  good  bishop,  who  mortally  hated  both  Owen  and 
Cadogan,  thought  his  petition  any  thing  but  ill-timed,  and  rewarded  him  with  an  estate. 

Owen  now  returned  from  Ireland,  and  both  he  and  Madoc,  on  payment  of  large  fines, 
received  a  full  pardon  from  the  king,  who,  however,  cautioned  the  latter  to  remember,  that 
his  security  from  the  relations  of  those  whom  he  had  murdered  still  depended  upon  his  own 
providence.  He  did  not  live  long  without  feeling  the  truth  of  this  warning :  Meredyth, 
the  surviving  brother  of  Cadogan  and  lorwerth,  resolved  to  avenge  their  deaths;  and  con- 
fiding his  intentions  to  a  party  of  his  retainers,  they  strenuously  supported  him,  and  by  a 
stratagem  surprised  Madoc,  and  made  him  their  prisoner.  Meredyth  instantly  sent  word 
to  his  nephew  Owen  that  the  miscreant  was  secured,  and  ready  to  be  strangled  ;  but  Owen 
not  being  able  to  stifle  all  regard  for  his  old  associate,  would  only  consent  to  put  both  his 
eyes  out,  and  divide  all  his  property  between  himself  and  his  uncle. 

Owen  again  rebelled  against  the  king,  but  was  again  pardoned,  and  soon  after  became 
a  chosen  favourite,  and  received  the  honour  of  knighthood.  At  this  time  Gruffyd  ap 
Rhys,  a  great  and  good  prince,  indignant  at  the  wrongs  which  his  country  was  suffering 

from 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  99 

from  the  Normans  and  Flemings,  rose  in  arms,  and  spread  ruin  and  death  among  them. 
When  the  king  heard  of  these  disasters,  he  sent  for  Owen,  assured  him  that  his  whole  trust 
was  in  him,  and  that  if  he  would  kill  "  that  murderer,  Gruffyd  ap  Rhys,"  his  reward  should 
be  unbounded.  Owen  was  delighted -at  this  mark  of  royal  confidence,  and  in  an  enthu- 
siasm of  generous  acknowledgment,  collected  his  followers,  and  swore  with  them,  that 
neither  man,  woman,  nor  child,  should  escape  their  hands  alive.  Though  unable  to  destroy 
the  prince,  they  amply  fulfilled  their  vow  of  general  slaughter:  the  people  fled  into  the 
wilds  and  thickets  pursued  by  their  merciless  followers,  who  divided  themselves  into  small 
bands,  and  left  no  corner  unsearched.  Owen  took  with  him  a  company  of  one  hundred  men, 
and  having  satiated  himself  with  blood,  was  returning  to  join  the  main  body  when  he  was 
unexpectedly  checked  in  his  course.  Gerald,  governor  of  Pembroke,  was  at  this  time  in 
this  part  of  the  country,  with  a  strong  band  of  Flemings,  in  pursuit  of  the  prince,  GrurTyd 
ap  Rhys,  and  meeting  with  some  of  the  miserable  wretches  who  had  fled  from  Owen,  learned 
from  them  that  he  was  near  at  hand,  attended  only  by  a  few  companions.  Such  an  op- 
portunity for  revenge  was  not  to  be  neglected ;  he  therefore  hastened  forwards,  and  soon 
discovered  the  party.  Owen's  men,  seeing  the  numbers  that  were  against  them,  urged  him 
to  fly ;  but  he  rejected  their  advice,  and  encouraged  them  to  fight,  vauntingly  protesting 
that  although  their  enemies  were  seven  to  one,  yet  they  were  only  Flemings,  and  fit  for 
nothing  but  to  empty  cups.  He  then,  as  if  fully  persuaded  that  what  he  had  said  was  the 
fact,  began  the  attack ;  but  on  the  very  first  onset  received  an  arrow  in  his  heart*.  All 
these  atrocities,  which  I  have  summed  up  from  the  seizure  of  Gerald's  wife  to  the  death  of 
Owen,  were  crowded  into  the  short  interval  of  eight  years. 

Gerald  had  recovered  his  wife  before  the  death  of  Owen,  but  by  what  means  it  does  not 
appear.  She  was  very  innocently  the  cause  of  further  misfortunes  to  him ;  for  being  sister  to 
a  Welsh  prince,  the  King  of  England  suspected  that  she  might  exert  a  dangerous  influence 
over  the  loyalty  of  her  husband,  and  therefore  removed  him  from  the  government  of  Pem- 
broke, and  appointed  Gilbert  Strongbow  to  succeed  him,  the  first  who  came  into  this 
possession  with  the  title  of  Earl  of  Pembroke,  and  with  the  privileges  of  a  palatinate. 
From  this  period  to  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  the  Earls  of  Pembroke  reigned  as 
sovereign  princes  over  the  country,  with  power  to  appoint  sheriffs,  coroners,  chancellors, 
and  other  officers,  to  execute  all  writs  in  their  own  name,  and  to  pardon  murders, 
felonies,  and  all  other  offences.  The  earldom  remained  in  the  family  of  the  first  earl  for 
two  hundred  and  eighty  years,  when  it  was  wrested  from  them  by  Richard  the  Second, 
from  whose  reign,  to  that  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  it  was  held  by  many  different  families,  a 
fluctuating  tenure,  at  the  mercy  of  all  the  changes  of  the  English  crown.  Henry  the 
Eighth  took  away  its  jurisdiction  as  a  palatinate,  and  reduced  it  to  a  simple  earldom, 
which  was  conferred  by  his  son,  Edward  the  Sixth,  on  Sir  William  Herbert,  and  in  his 
family  it  still  remains. 

*  See  History  of  Cambria,  by  Powel. 

o  We 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

We  took  a  boat  at  Pembroke,  and  proceeded  down  the  haven  to  Milford :  the  branch 
of  the  haven  which  flows  up  to  Pembroke  is  navigable  only  for  vessels  of  small  burden, 
and  for  an  interval  of  nearly  two  miles  is  so  narrow,  that,  with  a  foul  wind,  we  found  it  ex- 
ceedingly difficult  to  work  our  passage  in  a  boat  not  more  than  twenty-four  feet  in  length. 
It  spreads  considerably  at  the  Down  Pool,  but  opens  into  the  main  stream  through  a  strait 
only  two  hundred  yards  broad  at  high  water,  and  at  low  water  little  more  than  one 
hundred.  There  was  a  strong  wind  blowing  from  the  west;  and  when  we  cleared  this 
strait  we  found  so  rough  a  sea  that  we  conceived  it  dangerous  to  proceed,  but  Avere  in- 
formed that  our  only  alternative  was  to  remain  all  night  at  anchor  in  the  boat,  for  the  tide 
had  ebbed  too  far  to  admit  of  our  return,  and  a  neck-deep  plain  of  mud  on  each  side  of 
the  stream  rendered  it  completely  impossible  to  land  at  any  point  between  the  strait  and 
Pembroke.  The  tides  are  extremely  rapid,  and  when  a  strong  wind  blows  against  the 
tide  it  raises  if  not  a  high  sea,  at  least  one  that  is  very  dangerous  for  open  boats.  The 
waves  that  are  forced  up  by  this  opposition  of  wind  and  tide  are  of  a  peculiar  character, 
and  very  distinct  from  the  regular  swell  of  the  sea :  they  do  not  rise  like  a  rounded  hill, 
with  the  sides  gradually  sloping,  but  start  up  suddenly  and  as  perpendicular  as  a  wall ; 
so  that  a  boat,  instead  of  passing  over,  passes  through  them.  We  landed  at  Milford  in 
the  dark,  with  our  boat  half  full  of  water,  after  a  passage  of  five  hours,  though  the  distance 
in  a  right  line  from  Pembroke  is  not  more  than  six  miles. 

The  town  of  Milford  is  but  of  late  creation,  though  it  was  once  expected  that  before 
the  present  period  of  the  world  it  would  have  grown  into  a  city,  to  rival  some  of  the  first 
commercial  towns  of  the  kingdom.  In  the  year  1784,  Mr.  Greville,  struck  with  the  spa- 
ciousness and  security  of  the  haven,  and  the  advantages  which  it  held  out  to  commercial 
adventure,  first  conceived  the  plan  of  raising  the  new  town,  and  applied  himself  with  great 
spirit  to  carry  his  design  into  execution.  His  uncle,  the  late  Sir  William  Hamilton,  was 
the  proprietor  of  the  land  on  which  it  was  proposed  to  build,  and  gave  it  up  to  the 
management  of  Mr.  Greville,  with  power  to  grant  leases  and  employ  it  in  any  manner  that 
he  thought  would  be  most  conducive  to  the  interest  of  his  new  establishment.  The  ground 
was  laid  out,  the  bricklayers  began  their  work,  and  in  a  very  few  years  a  town  sprung  up, 
of  small  extent  indeed,  but  which,  calculating  on  the  spirit  with  which  it  was  begun, 
promised  a  rapid  increase.  But  unfortunately  the  sanguine  expectations  which  set  all 
this  enterprize  in  motion  were  not  kept  alive  by  early  encouragement :  commerce  did  not 
improve  in  proportion  to  the  opportunities  which  were  held  out  for  its  exercise,  and  con- 
sequently the  activity  of  speculation  was  repressed,  and  the  extent  and  population  of  the 
town  have  for  some  years  remained  stationary.  It  had  been  hoped  that  government 
would  have  assisted  the  rising  importance  of  Milford,  by  making  it  a  great  naval  depot ; 
but  its  situation  has  not  been  considered  as  well  calculated  for  such  an  establishment,  and 
this  decision  against  it  will  probably  operate  as  an  eternal  bar  to  its  ever  realizing  those 

visions  of  greatness  once  entertained  by  its  founder. 

The 


VOVAOK  HOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  101 

The  town  is  very  pleasantly  situated,  the  principal  range  of  buildings  occupying  an 
elevated  terrace,  with  the  haven  in  front.  There  is  a  very  large  and  excellent  hotel,  which 
was  among  the  earliest  buildings  of  the  new  town,  and  was  erected  for  the  accommodation 
of  passengers  to  and  from  Ireland.  There  are  five  packets  belonging  to  the  port,  which 
sail  to  Waterford. 

The  church  stands  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  town,  and  is  rather  a  melancholy 
memorial,  for,  according  to  the  original  design,  it  was  to  have  formed  the  centre.  In  the 
interior  is  deposited  a  very  interesting  relic,  the  truck  of  the  mainmast  of  the  French  ship, 
I/Orient,  which  was  sawed  off  by  Sir  Samuel  Hood,  after  she  had  blown  up  in  the  battle 
of  the  Nile :  near  it,  on  the  pedestal  of  a  vase  of  red  porphyry,  brought  from  Egypt,  is  the 
following  inscription  to  the  memory  of  Lord  Nelson  : — 

The  Almighty  blessed  his  course,  and  ending  it  in 

Victory,  permitted  him  to  become  an  immortal  Example  for 

The  heroic  Navy  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 

To  uphold  the  honour  and  empire  of  its  Sovereign  on  the  seas. 

Alii  ford  was  a  favourite  port  with  Lord  Nelson;  and  the  anniversary  of  the  first  of  August 
is  always  held  here  as  a  festival. 

The  trade  of  the  town  is  very  confined :  a  few  families  from  America  settled  here  on 
the  invitation  of  Mr.  Greville,  and  every  thing  like  commerce  and  enterprize  is  supported 
by  their  activity.  Mr.  Rotch,  the  principal  of  the  new  settlers,  has  several  large  ships  em- 
ployed in  the  South  Sea  Whale-fishery;  and  this  is  by  far  the  most  important  concern  in  the 
place.  We  had  the  pleasure  of  being  introduced  to  this  gentleman,  who  received  us  with 
so  much  hospitality,  and  exerted  himself  with  so  much  active  kindness  in  promoting  the 
objects  of  our  pursuit,  that  our  stay  at  Milford  was  among  the  pleasantest  parts  of  our  tour. 

On  the  day  after  our  arrival  we  made  a  little  excursion  down  the  haven  in  Mr. 
Rotch's  pleasure  boat,  a  very  small  vessel,  but  of  rare  powers,  and  as  well  known  at 
Milford  as  Eclipse  was  at  Newmarket.  Among  the  sports  established  here  in  comme- 
moration of  the  first  of  August  is  a  boat  race.  Lord  Nelson  was  present  at  the  first  which 
took  place,  and  the  recollection  of  this  circumstance  has  since  attached  to  the  sport  an 
unusual  degree  of  interest  and  importance.  There  is  a  good  policy  in  these  contests,  in- 
dependent of  other  considerations,  for  the  builders  of  the  boats  feel  as  much  interested  in 
their  success  as  the  owners,  and  a  spirit  of  competition  is  thus  raised  among  them,  which 
is  very  beneficial  to  their  art.  We  had  a  fresh  breeze  for  our  expedition,  but  the  water 
being  smoother  than  on  the  preceding  evening,  and  not  encroaching  upon  the  interior  of 
the  boat,  we  were  permitted  to  enjoy  without  disturbance  our  survey  of  this  noble  haven. 
I  say  noble  haven,  merely  as  it  affected  my  own  eye,  for  there  is  a  great  diversity  of 
opinions  on  the  subject;  and  while  some  have  declared  it  to  be  at  once  the  most  spacious, 
most  secure,  and  most  commodious  harbour  round  the  kingdom,  and  have  been  anxiously 

hoping 


102  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    I5RITAIX. 

hoping  that  government  would  duly  appreciate  its  advantages,  and  raise  it  to  that  national 
importance  which  they  think  it  deserves ;  others  have  decided  that  it  has  no  claims  to  any 
such  consideration,  and  is  utterly  unfit  for  the  purposes  of  a  naval  station.  I  was  informed 
by  several  people  on  the  spot,  who  were  well  acquainted  with  all  the  properties  of  the 
harbour,  and  spoke  with  the  authority  of  experience,  that  it  fully  justified  all  that  had 
been  said  in  its  favour,  that  it.  had  room  enough  to  contain  more  than  the  whole  navy  of 
England,  and  that  vessels  might  sail  in  or  out  with  perfect  security  by  day  or  by  night. 
Lord  Nelson  declared  that  it  was  the  finest  haven  in  Europe,  and  predicted  that  the  town 
of  Milford,  from  the  great  and  manifest  advantages  of  its  situation,  would  realize  the 
most  sanguine  expectations  of  its  founder. 

The  difficulty  of  getting  out  with  a  westerly  wind  has  been  considered  as  one  great 
objection  to  the  haven ;  but  that  must  be  a  choice  haven  indeed  which  can  accommodate 
its  passage  to  every  wind.  Ships  may  be  detained  at  Plymouth  by  a  southerly  wind,  and 
the  detention  is  in  this  case  the  more  serious,  as  this  is  a  fair  wind  both  up  and  down 
channel.  Milford  has  a  decided  superiority  over  Plymouth  in  its  complete  protection 
from  the  sea.  The  entrance  is  to  the  south ;  but  the  channel,  after  running  a  little  more 
than  a  mile  to  the  north,  turns  abruptly  to  the  east,  and  becomes  perfectly  landlocked  on 
all  sides.  The  entrance  is  nearly  two  miles  wide,  and  the  channel  deep  and  free  from  all 
obstructions.  After  forming  an  angle  it  runs  to  the  east  in  one  long  reach  for  about  nine 
miles,  when  it  turns  again  to  the  north,  and  continues  in  that  direction  till  it  is  joined  by 
the  two  rivers  the  East  and  the  West  Cleddau.  Its  whole  length,  from  its  mouth  to  the 
junction  of  the  rivers,  is  about  sixteen  miles;  and  its  mean  breadth  may  be  computed  at  a 
mile,  though  it  spreads  very  considerably  as  it  approaches  the  sea. 

Off  the  south  shore,  near  the  entrance,  is  a  small  rocky  island  called  Thorny  Island, 
on  which  a  frigate  was  wrecked  a  few  years  ago,  through  the  gross  ignorance  or  careless- 
ness of  the  pilot;  and  this  circumstance  has  very  probably  raised  an  unfavourable  impres- 
sion with  respect  to  the  general  security  of  the  haven.  The  simple  rule  for  avoiding  the 
dangers  of  this  island  is  to  keep  to  the  northward  of  it;  but  this  was  not  attended  to  by 
the  pilot  of  the  frigate,  who,  against  all  precedent,  attempted  to  steer  her  between  the 
island  and  the  nearest  shore,  and  lodged  her  upon  the  rocks. 

In  a  picturesque  view  Milford  Haven  affords  little  to  gratify  attention;  the  land  on 
each  side  is  tame  and  naked,  not  combining  with  any  variety  of  forms,  nor  with  the 
warmth  and  richness  of  vegetation  to  give  grace  and  beauty  to  the  water.  Numerous 
little  branches  diverge  from  the  main  stream  on  each  side,  and  in  some  of  these  sheltered 
recesses,  the  scenery,  by  the  addition  of  a  little  wood  and  verdure  to  the  land,  is  of  a 
more  pleasing  character.  We  landed  in  Dale  Bay,  near  the  harbour's  mouth,  and  pro- 
ceeded from  thence  to  the  lighthouses  on  St.  Anne's  Head.  A  narrow  peninsula,  which 
stretches  out  for  more  than  two  miles  from  the  north  shore,  forms  the  western  boundary  of 
the  haven,  and  seems  like  a  provision  of  nature  for  its  security ;  for  had  it  not  been  for 

this 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  103 

this  barrier  it  would  have  been  exposed  to  the  Atlantic,  and  perfectly  useless  as  a  harbour. 
St.  Anne's  Head  is  the  most  southern  point  of  this  peninsula,  and  is  a  very  bold  pro- 
montory, with  a  tremendous  precipice  on  two  sides  of  naked  and  shattered  rock.  There 
are  two  lighthouses  upon  it,  only  one  of  which  shews  a  light  up  the  harbour,  though  both 
are  visible  from  the  sea.  Lighthouses  were  first  erected  here  in  the  year  1?J4,  in  which 
the  light  was  derived  from  coal  fires ;  but  in  consequence  of  representations  from  the 
trade  of  its  inadequacy,  two  new  towers  were  built  in  the  year  1800,  and  the  lanterns 
furnished  on  the  improved  principle  with  Argand  lamps  and  reflectors.  The  low  light- 
house, which  is  situated  at  the  extremity  of  St.  Anne's  Head,  is  only  fifteen  feet  high,  but 
is  one  hundred  and  sixty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea;  and  exhibits  a  brilliant  and  con- 
tinued light,  seen  from  Skomar  Island  to  the  north,  from  Linney  Head  to  the  south-east,  and 
about  five  miles  up  the  harbour,  as  far  as  Hubberston.  The  high  lighthouse  is  distant  two 
hundred  and  three  yards  from  the  low  one,  and  shews  its  light  thirty  feet  above  it.  The 
light  of  this  tower  is  not  seen  from  the  harbour,  but  it  appears  equally  as  strong  as  that 
of  the  low  one,  from  Skomar  to  Linney  Head,  and  combining  with  it  in  stated  relations, 
affords  a  very  certain  and  intelligible  guide  to  navigators.  Off  Linney  Head  there  is  a 
dangerous  rock,  called  the  Crow  Rock,  and  further  to  the  westward  of  it  a  long  sand, 
called  the  Porgus  Bank,  both  of  which  are  in  the  track  of  vessels  approaching  the  harbour 
from  the  south-east ;  but  by  bringing  both  lights  in  a  line,  or  rather  the  low  light  imme- 
diately under  the  upper  one,  they  are  guided  safely  between  these  obstructions.  The  two 
lights  may  be  seen  in  clear  weather  at  the  distance  of  twelve  leagues  from  sea,  and  not 
only  serve  as  guides  to  Milford  Haven,  but  as  a  general  direction  to  the  navigator,  point- 
ing out  his  situation  off  the  coast,  and  in  the  channel,  when  bound  up  or  down  to  other 
ports. 

The  coast  to  the  northward  of  St.  Anne's  Head  continues  in  a  line  of  bold  and  steep 
cliffs  of  bare  rock.  The  whole  coast  of  Pembrokeshire  seems  not  only  to  have  suffered 
materially  from  the  sea  acting  with  its  common  powers  of  aggression,  but  to  have  been 
subject  to  some  violent  and  extraordinary  irruption.  It  is  very  remarkable  for  the  irregu- 
larities of  its  general  form  ;  for  its  deep  indentations ;  the  frequency  and  great  projection 
of  its  promontories,  and  the  numerous  islands  which  are  scattered  about  it.  In  the  course 
of  our  voyage  from  the  Land's  End  we  had  seen  a  vast  variety  in  the  configurations  and 
arrangement  of  rocks,  but  we  had  observed  no  coast  so  singularly  broken  and  contorted  in 
its  general  outline  as  that  of  Pembrokeshire.  All  its  peculiarities  are  strikingly  illustrated 
in  the  coast  to  the  northward  of  St.  Anne's  Head  :  the  prominence  of  the  peninsula,  of 
which  this  headland  forms  the  extreme  point,  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  at  the  distance 
of  less  than  two  leagues  there  is  another,  called  the  Hook,  which  is  no  where  much  more 
than  half  a  mile  broad,  and  projects  for  nearly  two  miles  into  the  sea.  This  point  is  the 
south-west  boundary  of  St.  Bride's  bay ;  a  very  deep  bay,  not  more  than  eight  miles  across, 
from  point  to  poinl,  but  including  in  its  whole  curve  an  extent  of  seven  leagues.  There 
is  a  tradition  that  a  great  part  of  this  bay  was  anciently  land,  and  covered  with  forest 

trees. 


104  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN". 

trees.  In  the  interval  between  St.  Anne's  Head  and  the  Hook  there  are  three  islands, 
two  of  them  of  considerable  size,  and  a  few  leagues  to  the  westward  of  the  Hook  the  sea 
is  studded  with  rocks. 

Skokham  Island  is  rather  less  than  five  miles  to  the  north-west  of  St.  Anne's  Head, 
and  distant  about  three  miles  from  the  nearest  point  of  the  main  land.  It  is  a  lofty 
island,  surrounded  by  a  steep  and  rugged  coast,  and  with  only  two  landing  places.  It 
contains  about  two  hundred  acres  of  land,  part  of  which  is  inclosed,  and  yields  barley, 
oats,  and  grass,  but  in  no  great  abundance.  A  Robinson  Crusoe,  however,  cast  upon 
it  in  its  present  condition,  might  subsist  very  comfortably,  and  would  find  at  least 
some  substitute  for  all  the  common  wants  of  life.  His  animal  food  would  consist 
principally  of  rabbits,  but  of  these  he  would  have  a  plentiful  and  continual  supply. 
His  only  difficulty  indeed  would  be  to  keep  these  little  animals  under  proper  subjection, 
for  they  multiply  with  such  prodigious  force  and  freedom,  that  unless  regularly  and 
copiously  thinned  they  would  soon  make  a  waste  of  the  whole  island.  There  are  several 
springs  of  excellent  water,  and  a  kind  of  turbary  of  five  or  six  acres  which  produces  tolerable 
fuel.  The  island  pays  no  parish  rates  or  tithes  whatever;  though  I  do  not  exactly  mention 
this  circumstance  as  particularly  favourable  to  the  happiness  of  a  Robinson  Crusoe. 

Skomar  Island  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  northward  of  Skokharn,  and  imme- 
diately opposite  to  the  Hook  Point,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a  strait  about  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  wide,  called  Jack  Sound.  It  is  a  much  larger  island  than  Skokham, 
containing  seven  hundred  acres  of  land,  but  is  of  much  the  same  general  character,  and 
equally  swarms  with  rabbits.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  very  early  policy  to  stock  these 
islands  with  these  fruitful  animals,  and  they  are  found  to  compensate  in  a  great  degree  for 
the  penuriousness  of  every  other  produce.  Owen,  in  his  account  of  Pembrokeshire,  written 
in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  and  now  published  in  the  Cambrian  Register,  observes  of  the 
two  islands,  Skomar  and  Skokham,  that  their  pasture  was  valued  at  fifty-five  shillings  an- 
nually, and  the  rabbits  upon  them  at  fourteen  pounds  five  shillings.  The  disproportion  is 
not  so  violent  at  present,  but  the  preponderance,  I  believe,  is  still  in  favour  of  the  rabbits, 
four  thousand  of  which  are  annually  killed  on  Skomar. 

There  is  an  island  called  Gateholm,  midway  between  Skomar  and  Skokham,  and 
about  the  same  distance  from  the  main  land  as  the  former,  but  it  is  too  small  to  be  worthy 
of  cultivation,  and  affords  no  matter  for  description.  About  seven  miles  N.N.W.  from 
Skomar  lies  Gresholm,  a  low,  rocky,  and  desert  island,  the  sole  property,  or  at  least  pos- 
session, of  sea-fowl.  Four  miles  to  the  westward  of  it  there  is  a  cluster  of  rocks,  which 
appear  at  low  water  in  scattered  spots  above  the  sea,  and  are  descriptively  called  Hats 
and  Barrels.  Six  miles  still  further  to  the  westward  is  a  more  extensive  and  dangerous 
reef  of  rocks,  called  the  Smalls,  some  appearing  at  all  times  in  large  masses  above  the  sea, 
and  others  disclosed  by  the  fall  of  the  tide.  On  one  of  them  there  is  a  lighthouse,  which 
stands  in  a  more  exposed  and  terrible  situation  than  any  other  building  of  the  kind  on 
any  part  of  our  coast,  the  Eddystone  not  excepted.  It  is  seven  leagues  from  the  main 

land, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  105 

land,  completely  open  to  the  Atlantic,  and  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  wild  and  dis- 
ordered sea.  At  the  Eddystone  the  tide  runs  less  than  three  knots,  and  here  more  than 
six.  The  main  rock  of  the  Smalls,  upon  which  the  lighthouse  is  erected,  is  about  fifty 
yards  in  length,  lying  S.E.  and  N.W.;  but  is  not  more  than  six  feet  above  high  water- 
mark, so  that  the  sea,  if  in  any  degree  agitated,  passes  entirely  over  it,  and  in  gales  of 
wind  from  the  south  or  west  rises  in  a  body  thirty  feet  above  it.  To  the  south-east  of  this 
rock  are  four  smaller  rocks,  which  appear  in  a  line  before  low  water,  extending  to  the 
distance  of  one  hundred  yards.  Still  further  out  is  a  sunken  rock,  immediately  beyond 
which  there  is  a  depth  of  forty  fathoms.  The  rock  of  the  Smalls  is  basaltic,  containing 
twenty-five  per  cent  of  iron,  and  is  easily  fusible  in  a  common  coal  fire. 

The  lighthouse  is  built  entirely  with  wood,  and  is  very  skilfully  contrived.  The  base 
consists  of  eight  oak  posts,  whole  trees,  surrounding  a  central  one,  and  so  arranged  as  to 
form  a  segment  of  an  octagonal  pyramid,  twenty-four  feet  wide  at  the  base,  and  sixteen 
feet  at  the  apex.  The  posts  are  fixed  eight  feet  deep  into  the  rock,  and  rise  forty  feet  above 
it :  the  intervals  between  them  are  open  so  as  to  give  a  free  passage  for  the  sea,  except 
for  a  small  space  near  the  summit,  where  there  is  a  close  boarded  cabin  seven  feet  high,  in 
which  three  men  live,  who  have  the  charge  of  the  lighthouse :  above  this  there  is  a  wooden 
cage  forming  the  lantern.  The  building  was  erected  in  the  summer  of  1775,  by  Mr. 
Whitesides  of  Liverpool,  a  very  ingenious  man,  who  is  still  the  superintendant  of  the 
lighthouse.  Three  of  the  pillars  were  originally  of  cast  iron,  but  they  soon  grew  loose  in 
the  sockets,  and  were  removed  in  the  summer  of  1776,  and  Avooden  posts  substituted  in 
their  place.  In  the  winter  of  that  year,  the  first  in  which  the  building  had  been  inhabited) 
the  people  were  reduced,  by  a  long  continuance  of  stormy  weather,  to  a  situation  of  ex- 
treme peril  and  distress.  No  previous  care  seems  to  have  been  taken  to  settle  any  plan 
of  regular  and  certain  communication  with  the  shore ;  and  in  consequence  of  this  unac- 
countable negligence  they  remained  utterly  unnoticed  for  several  months,  till  they  were 
almost  without  provisions,  and  till  their  dwelling  became  so  crazy  and  insecure  that  they 
expected  every  tide  to  sweep  it  away.  In  the  last  extremity  they  first  thought  of  making 
known  their  distress  by  trying  the  fortune  of  a  letter  in  a  cask :  they  wrote  three,  which 
all  reached  the  shore,  and  one  in  a  little  creek,  immediately  under  the  house  of  Mr.  Wil- 
liams, near  St.  David's,  to  whom  they  were  all  addressed,  and  who  was  the  proper  agent 
of  the  lighthouse*.  This  one  was  picked  up  as  soon  as  it  came  ashore,  and  the  men 
were  speedily  released.  Mr. 

*  The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  letter,  which  from  people  who  appear  to  have  been  most  outrageously  neglected, 
is  written  in  so  mild  and  patient  a  spirit  that  I  think  it  worth  transcribing. 

S,R,  To  MK"  WILLIAMS.  Smalht  Febfuary  lgl>  n77> 

Being  now  in  a  most  dangerous  and  distressed  condition  upon  the  Smalls,  do  hereby  trust 
Providence  will  bring  to  your  hand  this,  which  prayeth  for  your  immediate  assistance  to  fetch  us  off  the  Smalls  before 


106  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BUITAIIf. 

Mr.  Whitesides  was  one  of  the  sufferers  on  this  occasion,  having  very  enthusiastically 
devoted  himself  to  a  winter's  imprisonment,  merely  that  he  might  witness  the  first  trial  of 
his  own  work.  In  the  course  of  his  bitter  experience  he  had  well  appreciated  all  its  im- 
perfections, and  so  fully  studied  their  cause  and  their  remedy  that  he  soon  repaired  the 
building,  making  such  alterations  and  additions  as  enabled  it  to  stand  for  more  than  thirty 
years  without  receiving  any  material  injury.  It  lately,  however,  suffered  a  shock  which 
had  very  nearly  destroyed  it.  On  the  night  of  the  18th  of  October,  1812,  there  blew  a 
hurricane  in  St.  George's  Channel,  exceeding  in  violence  any  that  ever  had  been  remembered, 
which  strewed  the  shore  with  wrecks,  and  even  in  Milford  Haven,  landlocked  as  it  is, 
drove  eighteen  vessels  on  shore,  several  of  which  were  totally  wrecked.  In  the  course  of 
this  night  one  of  the  supporting  posts  of  the  lighthouse  on  the  Smalls  was  broken  to  pieces, 
and  others  were  loosened  and  displaced ;  the  lantern  was  entirely  swept  away,  and  the 
men's  cabin  so  shattered  that  the  sea  burst  in  upon  them  and  drenched  them  with  every 
wave.  They  gave  up  all  hope  of  being  saved,  and  waited  in  utter  darkness,  their  cabin 
rocking  in  the  wind,  and  the  pillars  cracking  under  them,  for  the  final  crush,  which  they 
expected  every  moment  to  overwhelm  them.  When  the  morning  dawned  the  violence  of 
the  gale  had  abated,  but  the  sea  was  still  flying  over  them,  and  they  saw  all  the  misery  of 
their  situation,  without  any  prospect  of  relief.  On  the  night  of  the  19th,  a  Waterford 
packet,  bound  to  Milford,  passed  by  the  Smalls,  and  it  was  then  discovered  that  the  light 
was  missing.  The  circumstance  was  communicated  to  the  agent  of  Trinity-house  at 
Milford,  who  requested  the  masters  of  all  the  packets  to  take  advantage  of  the  first 
favourable  opportunity,  when  they  were  passing,  of  affording  relief  to  the  people.  At- 
tempts were  made  on  several  succeeding  days  to  approach  the  rock,  but  the  violence  of  the 
surf  rendered  it  quite  impracticable  for  any  boat  to  land.  A  cask  was  washed  on  shore 
with  a  letter  in  it  from  the  wretched  men,  in  which  they  earnestly  begged  to  be  taken  off, 
and  a  signal  of  distress  was  seen  flying  on  the  lighthouse ;  but  no  assistance  could  be  given 
to  them,  and  they  remained  in  this  deplorable  situation  till  the  2d  of  November.  There 
is  a  vessel  appointed  to  attend  upon  the  Smalls,  but  she  had  been  damaged  in  the  gale  of 
the  eighteenth,  and  was  unable  to  put  to  sea. 

The  lighthouse  was  unoccupied  during  the  remainder  of  the  winter  of  1812,  but  being 
repaired  in  the  course  of  the  following  spring,  the  light  was  again  exhibited  on  the  9th  of 
June. 

We  should  have  been  much  gratified  by  making  a  voyage  to  see  this  curious  building, 
but  were  deterred  from  the  undertaking  by  the  uncertainty  of  the  passage,  and  a  principle 


the  next  spring  (title),  or  we  fear  we  shall  all  perish  :  oor  water  near  all  gone ;  our  fire  quite  gone ;  and  our  house  in  a 
most  melancholy  manner.  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  fetch  us  from  here  as  fast  as  possible ;  we  can  be  got  off  at  some 
part  of  the  tide  almost  any  weather.  I  need  say  no  more,  but  remain  your  distressed 

Humble  servant, 

HY.  WHITESIDES. 


severe 


VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  10? 

of  severe  but  necessary  economy  in  the  employment  of  our  time.  My  information  on  the 
subject  has  been  derived  from  the  Trinity-house ;  the  gentlemen  of  that  corporation  having, 
with  great  kindness  and  condescension,  permitted  me  to  apply  to  their  agents  for  parti- 
culars relating  to  all  the  lighthouses  on  the  coast,  and  I  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing 
both  for  my  friend  Mr.  Daniell  and  myself  our  high  sense  of  their  favour. 

After  our.  survey  of  St.  Anne's  Head,  and  the  adjoining  coast,  we  returned  to  Dale 
Bay,  and  rested  at  the  village  of  Dale,  consisting  of  a  few  fishermen's  cottages,  and  a 
decent  public  house,  which,  whatever  may  be  its  ordinary  means  of  accommodation  for 
hungry  travellers,  was  by  the  mediation  of  our  friends  very  amply  provided  at  the  time 
of  our  visit.  Dale  is  said  to  be  the  spot  where  the  Earl  of  Richmond,  afterwards  Henry 
the  Seventh,  landed  with  his  troops  from  France,  and  with  great  probability,  as  it  is  the 
first  convenient  landing-place  on  this  side  of  the  haven.  He  was  joined  here  by  Sir  Rhys 
ap  Thomas,  a  man  of  high  consideration  in  Wales,  whose  powerful  co-operation  was  very 
instrumental  to  Henry's  success.  This  gallant  knight,  though  indignant  at  the  cruelties 
and  tyranny  of  Richard,  had  felt  the  necessity  of  temporizing,  and  with  this  view  had 
written  to  the  king  from  Carmarthen,  declaring  that  no  rebel  should  land  at  Milford 
Haven  without  walking  over  his  body.  This  was  rather  an  intemperate  style  of  expression 
for  a  man  who  was  influenced  only  by  a  cold  policy ;  and  when  it  was  determined  by  the 
friends  of  the  earl  that  he  should  land  at  Milford,  Sir  Rhys  was  not  a  little  puzzled  to  de- 
termine by  what  means  he  could  escape  with  a  clear  conscience  from  his  engagement. 
The  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  however,  and  other  churchmen,  prevailed  upon  him  by  slow 
degrees  to  believe,  that  there  was  nothing  offensive  to  the  laws  of  honour  and  morality  in 
violating  an  unguarded  promise,  and  sustained  by  such  authority  he  became  an  active 
partisan  in  the  new  cause.  Having  disengaged  himself  from  the  spirit  of  his  promise,  there 
was  nothing  left  but  to  trick  himself  out  of  all  obligation  to  its  literal  signification;  there- 
fore, at  the  moment  of  the  earl's  landing  he  extended  himself  quietly  upon  the  ground, 
and  requested  him  to  step  over  his  body.  Some  accounts  deny  that  he  had  recourse  to 
this  desperate  mode  of  humiliation,  and  maintain  that  he  merely  crept  under  the  arch 
of  a  bridge  while  the  earl  was  passing  over.  The  Welsh  give  to  Sir  Rhys  the  honour  of 
having  killed  Richard  with  his  own  hand ;  and  as  we  are  perfectly  ignorant  who  did  kill 
him,  Sir  Rhys  may  as  well  have  the  honour  as  another  man. 

Leaving  Dale,  we  committed  ourselves  again  to  our  boat:  we  had  not  advanced  far 
before  the  wind,  which  had  been  gradually  abating,  died  entirely  away,  and  the  haven, 
having  no  visible  outlet,  had  the  appearance  of  a  lake;  and  it  had  all  the  beauty  of  a  lake 
in  the  glassy  smoothness  of  its  water,  but  wanted  the  bright  sedgy  margin,  and  every  ac- 
companiment of  gracefulness  or  grandeur  in  the  country  on  all  sides,  to  give  it  the  full 
charm  of  lake  scenery.  At  low  water  it  is  bordered  by  a  broad  streak  of  mud,  and  there 
is  nothing  much  more  pleasing  in  the  banks  beyond  to  divert  the  eye  from  this  vile  de- 

v  formity. 


108  V01TAGF,    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

formity.  Trees  will  grow  under  skilful  management  in  situations  much  more  exposed, 
but  the  haven  seems  to  be  neglected  in  every  way,  and  doomed  to  have  as  little  wood  on 
its  banks  as  on  its  water. 

A  mile  to  the  north-east  of  Thorny  Island  there  is  a  narrow  reef  of  rocks  called  the 
Stack,  which  is  elevated  considerably  above  the  level  of  the  water,  and  is  steep  and 
abrupt  on  all  sides.  The  water  is  deep  all  round  it,  and  it  is  not  regarded  as  any  serious 
obstruction  in  the  way  of  navigation.  As  we  passed  it  we  were  amused  by  the  grotesque 
appearance  of  some  cormorants  which  were  sitting  upon  the  rocks,  five  or  six  in  a  row, 
as  upright  as  if  they  stood  upon  their  tails,  and  with  their  wings  expanded.  Their  feathers 
are  said  not  to  be  quite  impervious  to  the  water,  and  they  therefore  da  not  remain  long 
upon  it  at  a  time,  but  frequently  return  to  the  rocks  and  open  their  wings  that  they  may 
dry  themselves  in  the  sun  and  air.  We  had  not  often  seen  them  in  places  where  they 
were  so  liable  to  interruption,  but  their  choice  in  this  instance  was  probably  governed 
by  the  redundancy  of  food,  their  greatest  of  all  possible  temptations.  They  are  very  dis- 
gusting birds  in  their  habits,  and  stink  most  abominably.  After  having  gormandized  till 
they  have  no  power  either  to  catch  or  swallow  another  mouthful,  they  crawl  to  a  rock, 
and  there  sit  dozing  in  a  state  of  stupor,  under  all  the  horrors  of  digestion,  and  oc- 
casionally venting  a  low,  hoarse,  half-suffocated  croak,  which  tells  of  all  that  they  endure. 
We  had  seen  them  in  this  state,  when  they  were  so  tamed  by  their  sufferings  that  nothing 
could  alarm  them,  neither  words  nor  stones;  they  seemed  to  be  reduced  to  that  total  care- 
lessness of  life  which  is  felt  by  people  under  the  pals}r  of  sea-sickness.  When  relieved  from 
this  burdensome  process  they  are  exceedingly  lively  and  energetic,  dive  after  their  prey 
with  the  rapidity  of  a  dart,  and  seize  upon  it  with  amazing  certainty  :  they  emerge  from 
the  water  with  the  fish  across  the  bill,  twirl  it  up  into  the  air,  open  their  mouths,  and  re- 
ceive it  headforemost  into  their  stomachs.  As  long  as  there  is  a  fish  to  be  had  they  pursue 
this  game  with  the  same  alacrity,  till  reaching  the  borders  of  suffocation,  they  again  retire 
to  a  rock,  to  sit  out  the  dreary  term  of  digestion.  They  are  large  powerful  birds,  frequently 
weighing  seven  or  eight  pounds :  they  have  a  long,  sharp,  hooked  bill ;  their  colour  is 
nearly  black. 

Ornithologists  have  described  the  cormorant  as  of  a  stern,  sullen  character,  with  a 
keen  penetrating  eye,  and  carrying  in  his  whole  deportment  the  appearance  of  the  wary 
plunderer,  the  unrelenting  tyrant,  and  the  insatiate  glutton*.  I  know  not  that  he  is  more 
chargeable  with  the  sin  of  tyranny  than  other  sea-fowl :  a  few  herrings  more  or  less  make 
but  little  alteration  in  the  scale  of  atrocity;  and  the  gull  and  others,  though  their  stomachs 
may  not  be  quite  so  capacious,  pounce  upon  their  prey  with  the  same  pitiless  eagerness, 
and  devour  it  with  the  same  unfeeling  relish. 

*  Bewick'i  Bird*. 

We 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  109 

We  landed  at  the  little  port  of  Hubberstone  Haikin,  and  seeing  nothing  there  to  de- 
tain us  returned  to  Castle  Hall,  the  house  of  Mr.  Rotch,  about  a  mile  from  the  town  of 
Milford,  and  very  agreeably  situated  on  an  eminence  sloping  gently  down  to  the  haven. 
There  are  some  plantations  about  it,  which  are  in  a  very  thriving  condition,  and  no  doubt 
the  same  embellishment  might  be  extended  to  every  coast  of  the  haven.  We  were  de- 
tained two  days  at  Castle  Hall  by  rain,  and  spent  our  time  so  pleasantly  in  the  society  of 
Mr.  Rotch  and  his  family,  that  we  were  not  unthankful  for  so  good  an  excuse  to  our  con- 
sciences as  travellers  for  our  delay.  Mr.  Rotch  was  determined  that  we  should  feel  the 
benefit  of  his  obliging  attentions  far  beyond  the  limits  of  his  own  house,  and  on  the  return 
of  better  weather  insisted  upon  furnishing  us  with  a  carriage,  to  take  us  at  our  leisure  to 
Cardigan.  The  carriage  was  an  open  car,  drawn  by  a  single  horse,  both  admirably  framed 
for  a  voyage  over  Welsh  hills  and  roads.  We  hired  a  young  lad  in  the  neighbourhood, 
whose  recommendations  to  our  service  were  his  skill  in  driving,  and  his  knowledge  of  the 
country;  and  thus  completely  equipped,  we  took  leave  of  our  hospitable  friends  and 
renewed  our  journey. 

About  half  an  hour  after  our  departure  the  weather  changed,  and  a  heavy  rain  came 
on,  which  obscured  all  external  objects,  and  left  us  nothing  but  the  pleasures  of  imagina- 
tion. These  were  soon  interrupted  by  vulgar  sense,  and  we  gave  a  peremptory  order  to  our 
driver  to  hasten  to  the  first  convenient  place  of  shelter  that  was  at  hand,  when  to  our  ex- 
treme surprise  we  found  that  he  had  been  lost  for  some  time,  and  so  hopelessly,  that  he  had 
been  turning  to  the  right  and  left  as  the  lanes  presented  themselves,  entirely  under  the  direc- 
tion of  chance.  He  attributed  his  ignorance  to  the  state  of  the  atmosphere,  and  felt  quite 
confident  that  it  would  be  cleared  away  together  with  the  rain ;  but  he  deceived  himself,  for 
not  a  ray  of  better  light  came  upon  him  during  the  whole  of  our  journey  to  Cardigan. 

After  being  long  the  sport  of  the  blundering  and  conflicting  directions  of  pas- 
sengers whom  we  met  on  our  road,  we  finally  picked  our  way  into  Little  Haven,  where 
we  found  a  small  public  house,  but  a  large  fire,  and  this  was  more  than  we  expected,  and 
as  much  as  we  desired. 

In  the  afternoon  the  rain  subsided,  and  we  strolled  to  the  sea  shore,  where  we  beheld 
a  most  beautiful  effect  produced  by  a  new  alteration  in  the  weather.  There  had  been  a 
hot,  heavy,  loitering  air  from  the  south  during  the  day;  but  the  wind  now  suddenly  shifted, 
and  blew  strongly  from  the  west.  We  had  perceived  its  approach  by  a  darkening  of  the 
distant  sea,  and  we  soon  felt  it  cool  and  fresh  in  our  faces ;  presently  the  sun  burst  forth 
in  the  west,  and  the  whole  appearance  of  nature  was  changed  in  a  moment.  The  wind 
freshened  rapidly,  and  as  the  sea  rose  the  sun  shone  bright  on  the  top  of  every  wave, 
which  curled  and  foamed  as  it  swept  along,  while  the  great  body  of  the  water  was  in  deep 
shadow.  The  dark  scud  was  still  flying  over  our  heads,  and  was  finely  contrasted  with 
the  splendour  of  the  west,  but  in  half  an  hour  there  was  not  a  cloud  to  be  seen,  and  all 
was  equally  sparkling  and  brilliant.  The  effect  of  this  general  reanirnation  was  heightened 

by 


110  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

by  the  action  of  some  small  brigs  and  sloops,  which  had  been  lying  at  anchor  during  the 
calm,  but  had  now  crowded  every  sail  to  clear  the  land.  We  stood  to  contemplate  this 
scene  till  it  had  lost  the  charm  which  first  attracted  us,  its  novelty,  and  then  turned  our 
attention  to  what  else  there  was  to  be  seen  at  Little  Haven.  It  is  a  small  sandy  creek, 
with  no  pretensions  to  the  name  or  quality  of  a  haven,  except  in  the  summer  time,  and 
in  very  fine  weather,  when  vessels  may  venture  to  ground  in  it. 

Culm,  which  is  procured  in  large  quantities  near  the  spot,  is  the  only  article  of  ex- 
portation :  the  imports  depend  upon  the  industry  and  success  of  the  fishermen,  who, 
together  with  their  families,  form  the  population  of  the  village.  We  passed  the  night 
among  them,  but  were  in  our  car  betimes  in  the  morning.  The  coast  to  the  northward  of 
Little  Haven  is  rugged  and  rocky ;  but  as  the  tide  was  out,  we  were  enabled  to  pass 
over  the  sands  to  Broad  Haven,  another  creek,  of  rather  more  extent,  but  not  with  more 
of  the  character  of  a  haven.  There  are  a  few  decent  lodging-houses  at  this  place  for 
bathers ;  but  as  there  was  nothing  more  interesting  to  remark,  we  passed  on.  The  coast 
rises  to  the  northward  of  this  creek,  but  soon  dips  again,  and  continues  tame  and  flat  for 
several  miles.  The  front  of  St.  Bride's  Bay  is  generally  bounded  by  a  beach  of  large 
rounded  stones,  which  are  also  strewed  in  patches  over  the  sands,  as  far  as  the  tide  retires 
at  low  water,  and  seem  to  strengthen  the  traditional  account  of  the  encroachments  of  the 
sea.  The  irruption  is  referred  back  to  a  very  distant  antiquity.  Giraldus  observes,  that 
in  his  time,  after  a  storm  of  extraordinary  violence  the  surface  of  the  earth  was  laid  bare, 
which  had  been  covered  for  ages  with  sand,  and  discovered  the  trunks  of  trees  with  the 
marks  of  the  hatchet  appearing  upon  them  as  fresh  as  if  made  only  yesterday  :  he  further 
relates,  that  the  road  for  ships  became  impassable,  and  looked  not  like  a  shore,  but  like  a 
grove  cut  down,  perhaps  at  the  time  of  the  deluge  or  not  long  after.  Whether  people  thought 
of  cutting  down  trees  at  the  time  of  the  deluge,  or  how  long  after  that  event  there  were 
people  in  St.  Bride's  Bay,  or  how  soon  they  used  hatchets,  it  would  be  equally  difficult  to 
determine. 

After  passing  over  Newgall  Sands,  the  principal  scene  of  these  antediluvian  groves, 
we  turned  into  the  road  which  leads  along  the  coast  to  St.  David's.  This  artificial  way 
was  considerably  more  rugged  than  the  stony  beach  which  we  had  occasionally  to  contend 
with  in  our  passage  over  the  sands,  and  we  had  not  advanced  many  hundred  yards  before 
we  discovered  that  our  charioteer  was  not  in  any  degree  more  trustworthy  as  a  driver  than 
as  a  guide.  AVe  were  at  length  shamed  out  of  our  apprehensions  of  broken  bones  by  the 
intervention  of  a  turnpike,  where  we  were  called  upon  to  pay  for  our  use  of  a  road,  which 
we  had  very  lately  determined  that  nothing  but  the  love  of  glory  should  in  reason  have 
tempted  a  man  to  pass.  Hills,  hollows,  and  rocks  we  found,  and  had  expected  to  find, 
but  surely  nothing  was  ever  so  humorously  out  of  place  as  this  turnpike.  The  manner 
of  making  or  mending  the  highways,  as  it  is  called,  is  uniform  in  all  this  part  of  the 
country,  and  consists  in  overturning  upon  them  cart-loads  of  stones  as  big  as  one's  head, 

which, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  Ill 

which,  in  a  track  where  wheels  seldom  roll,  are  never  forced  down  into  the  earth,  but 
form,  as  the  old  woman  at  the  toll-gate  observed,  a  fine  hard  road. 

We  rested  from  our  labours  at  Solva,  a  small  mean  town,  but  in  a  very  romantic 
situation,  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep,  narrow,  and  serpentine  valley  opening  at  the  distance 
of  half  a  mile  into  the  sea,  which  at  high-water  flows  up  to  the  town.  Nearer  the  sea,  on 
the  summit  of  a  hill  at  the  west  side  of  the  valley,  there  are  six  or  eight  cottages  of  rather 
more  decent  appearance,  and  these  are  called  the  Upper  Town.  A  little  wood  on  the 
sides  of  the  hills  would  make  the  little  valley  of  Solva,  with  the  sea  winding  through  it, 
perfectly  beautiful ;  but  since  the  deluge,  trees  have  refused  to  grow  Avithin  sight  of  St. 
Bride's  Bay,  and  their  place  is  here  supplied  by  furze  and  fern. 

There  are  a  few  small  coasting  vessels  belonging  to  the  port,  and  the  harbour  affords 
shelter  to  vessels  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into  the  bay ;  but  it  is  difficult  of  access,  and 
not  to  be  approached  with  safety  by  a  stranger.  The  entrance  is  very  narrow,  and  has  a 
large  detached  mass  of  rock  nearly  in  the  centre,  which  so  blocks  up  the  passage,  that  at 
a  short  distance  from  the  land  no  opening  is  visible.  This  rock  renders  the  entrance 
dangerous,  but  it  acts  as  a  breakwater  and  protects  the  interior  of  the  harbour  from  the 
force  of  the  sea,  so  that  its  services,  good  and  ill,  are  nearly  balanced. 

Leaving  Solva,  we  proceeded  over  a  dreary  and  miserable  country  to  St.  David's.  We 
had  observed  no  great  vigour  of  vegetation  in  any  of  the  inland  parts  of  Pembrokeshire  which 
we  had  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing,  but  we  were  now  entering  upon  a  region  destitute 
of  every  charm  of  nature,  and  extended  around  us  in  unvaried  nakedness.  It  has  been 
represented  as  in  the  same  state  from  the  most  distant  times.  Giraldus  describes  it  with 
equal  force  and  fidelity  as  "  Terra  Saxosa,  sterilis  et  infoecunda ;  nee  sylvis  vestita,  nee 
fluminibus  distincta,  nee  pratis  ornata ;  ventis  solum,  et  procellis  semper  exposita."  In 
the  very  heart  of  this  melancholy  desert,  and  within  view  of  a  wild  and  terrible  coast, 
stands  the  city  of  St.  David's,  which,  whatever  may  have  been  its  former  extent  and  con- 
dition, is  now  reduced  to  a  village  of  the  meanest  and  most  wretched  description.  So 
mournful  a  combination  of  nature  and  art  I  never  remember  to  have  seen ;  every  object 
bears  the  same  impression  of  dismal  poverty,  whether  the  eye  settles  upon  the  ragged  and 
tattered  village,  or  wanders  over  the  surrounding  country,  divided  by  stone  walls  into  large 
unprofitable  enclosures,  without  one  spot  of  verdure,  and  with  a  soil  insufficient,  on  every 
little  eminence,  to  hide  the  nakedness  and  deformity  of  the  rocks. 

The  ancient  buildings  are  situated  in  a  deep  hollow,  and  no  part  of  them  is  visible 
from  the  village,  except  the  summit  of  the  cathedral  tower;  but  on  approaching  to  the 
brink  of  the  close,  they  all  burst  upon  you  in  one  view,  and  present  a  very  melancholy 
scene,  with  some  little  surviving  magnificence,  but  waste,  silent,  and  forsaken.  The  most 
striking,  though  one  of  the  most  ruinous  of  the  remains  is  the  palace,  erected  by  Bishop 
Gower  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Third.  This  building  has  now  no  roof,  the  bare  earth 
is  its  floor,  and  every  kind  of  decoration  within  is  utterly  destroyed ;  but  a  considerable 

part 


112  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

part  of  the  walls  is  still  standing,  by  which  we  may  ascertain  its  original  extent,  and  gain 
some  idea  of  the  splendour  of  its  architecture.  The  form  was  quadrangular.  The  walls 
are  very  lofty,  and  surmounted  all  round  by  a  parapet  raised  on  light  pointed  arches, 
which  are  studded  with  roses,  and  supported  by  small  octangular  columns,  with  orna- 
mented bases  and  capitals.  This  kind  of  parapet  is  peculiar  to  this  palace  and  some 
others  built  by  the  same  bishop,  and  its  effect  is  so  singularly  beautiful  that  it  is  extraor- 
dinary that  it  has  never  been  imitated. 

Many  of  the  apartments  may  still  be  traced  :  that  called  King  John's  hall,  occupy- 
ing the  south  side  of  the  quadrangle,  is  the  most  remarkable;  it  is  ninety-six  feet  long, 
and  thirty-three  feet  wide,  lighted  by  lofty  side  windows,  and  by  a  circular  one  at  the 
south  end,  with  sixteen  radii  diverging  from  a  quatrefoil  opening  in  the  centre,  and  most 
beautifully  carved.  King  John  is  said  to  have  been  entertained  in  this  room  on  his  return 
from  Ireland  ;  but  it  is  supposed  erroneously,  for  King  John  died  before  Bishop  Gower, 
its  reputed  founder,  was  born.  As  all  the  archives  of  St.  David's  are  lost,  this  question 
can  never  be  satisfactorily  decided ;  possibly  Bishop  Gower  did  not  build  the  whole  of  the 
palace,  but  simply  enlarged  it,  and  added  to  it  the  open  parapet,  which  is  said  to  be  the 
peculiar  characteristic  of  his  architecture. 

The  apartments  of  the  bishops  were  in  the  east  front :  their  hall  was  sixty-seven  feet 
long  and  twenty-five  feet  wide,  and  their  kitchen,  now  alas !  no  more,  was  on  a  very  large 
scale,  and  laid  out  with  that  critical  attention  to  convenience  which  so  important  a  subject 
deserved.  As  all  the  parts  and  proportions,  and  all  the  forms  of  ornament  still  dis- 
tinguishable in  this  once  noble  palace,  have  already  been  frequently  and  copiously 
illustrated,  I  will  not  swell  the  account  by  a  dilated  repetition :  every  succeeding  observer 
may  discover  in  it  some  new  effect  of  time,  but  no  new  traces  of  its  ancient  magnificence, 
and  little  is  gained  by  merely  registering  the  stages  of  its  decay. 

To  the  north  of  the  palace  there  are  numerous  remains  of  buildings,  once  the  resi- 
dences of  the  minor  ecclesiastics,  but  in  too  dilapidated  a  state  for  description.  The  cathe- 
dral, the  only  building  Avithin  the  close  that  is  not  perfectly  a  ruin,  has  nothing  remarkable 
in  its  exterior,  the  architecture  of  which  is  plain,  unornamented  Gothic.  The  west  front, 
however,  may  be  particularly  mentioned,  which  has  been  altered  by  Mr.  Nash  in  a  style 
of  the  most  barbarous  incongruity.  The  interior  is  exceedingly  solemn  and  majestic.  The 
nave  is  separated  from  the  side  aisles  by  grand  Saxon  arches,  richly  decorated,  and  above 
each  of  these  are  two  smaller  arches  extending  to  the  roof,  which  is  of  Irish  oak,  and 
elaborately  carved.  The  cathedral  has  been  altered  and  enlarged  at  different  times,  and 
combines  great  variety  in  its  modes  of  architecture :  the  lower  arches  are  entirely  Saxon, 
but  in  those  of  the  gallery  there  is  a  great  mixture  of  Gothic  ornament.  The  nave  is  the 
oldest  portion  of  the  building,  and  the  most  perfect,  though  it  betrays  many  appearances 
of  neglect  and  decay  :  the  pavement  is  broken  and  irregular,  and  much  of  the  finest  and 
most  delicate  kind  of  decoration  on  the  roof  and  on  the  arches  is  displaced  or  obtunded. 

The 


Solva,  near  St.  Davids,  Pembrokeshire 


View  of  the  entrance  to  Fishguard,  near  Goodwych  sands 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  113 

The  skreen,  supporting  the  rood-loft  in  front  and  separating  the  nave  from  the  choir, 
is  of  Gothic  architecture,  very  irregular,  but  exceedingly  light  and  elegant.  Under  the 
rood-loft  are  three  monuments,  which  are  remarkable  for  nothing  more  than  their  muti- 
lated condition.  All  the  monuments  in  the  cathedral  were  barbarously  defaced  during 
the  civil  wars  by  Cromwell  and  his  troops,  who  not  only  disfigured  their  sculpture  but 
obliterated  nearly  all  their  inscriptions,  so  that  they  are  now,  in  many  instances,  to  be 
identified  only  by  conjecture.  One  of  those  under  the  rood-loft  is  ascribed  to  Bishop 
Gower,  the  illustrious  founder  of  the  palace,  and  the  others  to  two  individuals,  whose  in- 
scriptions we  may  cheerfully  dispense  with.  The  choir  occupies  the  area  of  the  tower, 
which  is  supported  by  three  immense  pointed  arches,  and  a  circular  one  facing  the  nave, 
and  now  walled  up  above  the  skreen,  though  formerly  open,  and  admitting  a  continued 
perspective  to  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  cathedral.  The  rich  tracery  of  this  arch  is  still 
seen  figured  out  upon  the  blank  wall,  and  has  a  very  singular  effect.  The  roof  of  the  choir 
is  of  wood,  fantastically  painted,  and  part  of  the  floor  is  inlaid  with  a  Mosaic  pavement, 
in  good  preservation,  but  of  no  particular  beauty.  On  each  side  is  a  range  of  stalls,  with 
the  usual  ludicrous  and  indecent  embellishments  on  the  reverses  of  the  seats.  St.  Andrew's 
Chapel  forms  the  north,  and  the  Chanter's  Chapel  the  south  transept,  both  very  homely 
buildings,  with  nothing  worthy  of  notice  in  them. 

In  the  chancel,  which  is  separated  from  the  choir  by  a  low,  open  railing,  there  are 
some  interesting  monuments  :  on  the  north  side  is  the  effigy  of  the  Lord  Rhys,  Prince  of 
South  Wales,  one  of  the  greatest  names  in  the  history  of  his  country.  He  is  represented 
in  complete  armour,  with  a  lion  at  his  head  and  at  his  feet,  and  with  a  lion  rampant  on 
his  breastplate.  The  figure  is  very  little  mutilated  except  about  the  hands  and  arms,  and  is 
admirably  executed.  Immediately  opposite  to  it,  on  the  other  side  of  the  chancel,  is  another 
effigy  of  similar  design,  representing  Rhys  Gryg,  son  of  the  Lord  Rhys,  who  does  not 
fill  quite  so  large  a  space  in  history :  little  more  is  said  of  him  than  that  he  married  in  the 
year  1219;  died  in  1233,  and  was  honourably  buried  by  the  side  of  his  father.  On  the 
same  side,  and  on  the  pavement,  are  the  recumbent  figures  of  Bishops  Anselm  and  lor- 
werth,  the  former  of  whom  is  distinguished  by  an  inscription  to  the  following  effect : — 

PETRA,  PRECOR,  DIC  SIC 
ANSELMUS  EPISCOPUS  EST  HIC. 

There  was  formerly  an  inscription  in  the  same  style  on  a  flat  tomb-stone  in  the  choir, 
except  that  an  honest  Welshman  had  crept  into  the  couplet  in  a  more  mixed  costume. 
It  ran  thus: — 

PETRA,  PRECOR,  DIC  SIC; 

MORGANUS  AP  EYNON,  EST  HIC. 

In 


114  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

In  the  area  of  the  chancel  is  the  tomb  of  Edmund,  Earl  of  Richmond,  father  to 
Henry  the  Seventh ;  it  was  formerly  embellished  with  an  effigy  of  the  earl  in  brass,  with 
an  escutcheon  at  each  corner,  and  with  a  long  inscription  on  a  brass  plate,  but  all  these 
insignia  were  pilfered  during  the  civil  wars.  The  tomb  is  of  beautiful  marble,  dark  with 
white  spots,  and  most  brilliantly  polished.  In  the  north  wall  is  the  once  honoured  shrine 
of  Saint  David,  which  is  remarkable  for  its  simplicity.  The  lower  part  consists  of  a  plain 
tomb,  with  four  quatrefoil  apertures  in  front,  in  which  the  offerings  were  deposited  :  above 
this  are  three  Gothic  niches,  said  formerly  to  have  been  filled  by  an  illustrious  trio,  Saint 
David,  Saint  Patrick,  and  Saint  Denis. 

The  side  aisles  of  the  chancel  are  roofless,  and  yielded  up  without  remorse  to 
the  inclemencies  of  the  weather,  no  care  being  taken  to  preserve  the  monuments  or 
any  of  the  decorations  in  the  interior;  a  precaution  that  might  be  adopted  at  a  very  slight 
expense,  and  the  neglect  of  which  shows  a  sad  lack  of  taste  and  feeling.  In  the  south 
aisle  there  is  a  monument  under  a  canopy,  with  an  effigy  of  a  priest,  supposed  to  be  Gi- 
raldus,  but  on  no  certain  authority.  Under  another  canopy  in  the  same  aisle  is  the  tomb 
of  Silvester,  a  physician,  with  the  following  invidious  inscription,  which  seems  to  prove 
that  doctors  and  their  patients  are  much  on  a  par : — 

SILVESTER  MEDICUS  JACET  HIC.    EJUSQUE  RUINA, 
MONSTRAT  QUOD  MORTI  NON  OBSISTIT  MEDICINA. 

Bishop  Vaughan's  Chapel,  which  stands  between  the  ruined  aisles,  is  a  building  of 
exquisite  beaut}7,  in  the  style  of  highly  ornamented  Gothic  that  prevailed  at  the  latter  end  of 
the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh.  Though  surrounded  by  ruins,  it  has  hith'erto  escaped  all 
material  injury  :  the  roof  is  of  stone,  most  richly  and  elegantly  sculptured,  and  in  its  mi- 
nutest proportions  and  finest  ridges  as  fresh  and  as  sharp  as  if  finished  but  yesterday.  In 
the  east  wall  are  two  niches  of  equally  varied  and  delicate  workmanship,  but  not  in  a 
state  of  such  perfect  preservation. 

A  small  vestibule  leads  from  this  chapel  to  St.  Mary's  Chapel,  which  bounds  the 
cathedral  to  the  east.  It  has  no  roof,  and  all  the  pride  of  its  architecture  lies  in  scattered 
fragments  on  the  ground.  There  are  some  remains  of  handsome  monuments  in  it,  and 
among  others  that  of  Bishop  Martin  its  founder. 

There  is  reason  to  apprehend  that  the  whole  cathedral  is  rapidly  hastening  to  the 
ground,  for  independent  of  the  reckless  neglect  from  which  it  has  long  suffered,  it  is  ex- 
posed to  other  and  more  dangerous  sources  of  decay,  from  which,  perhaps,  no  care  could 
preserve  it.  It  is  built  upon  a  bog,  and  within  these  few  years  has  discovered  some  very 
alarming  symptoms,  resulting  from  this  faithless  foundation.  The  north  wall  leans  out- 
wards visibly,  but  its  danger  has  been  observed  and  attended  to,  and  it  is  now  supported 

by 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  115 

by  buttresses  on  the  outside,  in  which  form  has  been  so  utterly  sacrificed  to  strength,  that 
it  is  to  be  hoped  they  have  not  been  ineffectually  applied. 

Contiguous  to  the  north  side  of  the  cathedral,  and  formerly  connected  with  it  by 
cloisters,  is  St.  Mary's  college,  now  roofless  and  in  all  respects  a  ruin,  though  from  the 
fine  proportions  of  the  windows,  and  some  ornamental  sculpture  remaining  about  them,  it 
appears  to  have  been  an  elegant  building.  It  was  founded  by  Bishop  Martin  in  the  year 
1388,  who  endowed  it  with  100/.  per  annum.  The  community  consisted  of  a  master  and 
seven  priests,  who,  when  the  service  in  the  cathedral  had  fallen  into  neglect,  were  appointed 
to  preserve  at  least  some  little  worship,  with  instructions  to  sing  at  the  hours  of  high  mass, 
and  with  strict  injunctions  to  avoid  that  unhallowed  luxury  and  sensuality  which  had  begun 
to  encroach  upon  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  close. 

A  small  brook  runs  between  the  cathedral  and  the  palace,  called  the  Alan,  which  has 
been  the  scene  of  more  miracles  than  one.  It  had,  in  ancient  times,  a  flat  stone  laid  across 
it,  serving  for  a  bridge,  and  called  Lechlavar,  the  talking-stone,  from  having  once  openly 
expressed  its  displeasure  at  a  very  heavy  indignity  offered  by  some  thoughtless  wretches 
who  had  presumed  to  carry  a  corpse  over  it.  This  was  the  only  occasion  in  which  it  was 
ever  known  to  have  spoken,  a  circumstance  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  being  only  a  foot 
in  thickness,  it  cracked  in  twain  with  this  single  effort.  Giraldus  treats  this  story  as  a 
barbarous  superstition  of  an  early  and  uncultivated  age,  but  is  not  a  little  surprised  that  in 
his  time  the  river  should  have  flowed  with  wine. 

I  have  said  enough  concerning  the  present  mournful  condition  of  St.  David's  to  justify, 
and  indeed  make  necessary,  some  account  of  the  great  patron-saint,  and  the  rise  and 
decline  of  his  church  establishment ;  but  I  come  so  late  into  this  field  of  observation,  and 
after  so  many  predecessors,  that  my  remarks  cannot  be  very  novel,  and  shall  therefore  not 
be  very  long.  Saint  David  was  descended  from  illustrious  parents,  his  father  being  no  less 
than  Sandde  ap  Cedig  ap  Ceredig  ap  Cunedda  Wledig,  and  his  mother,  Non,  the  daughter 
of  Gynyr,  of  Caer  Gawch,  a  chieftain  of  Pembrokeshire.  This  is  the  most  accredited  story 
of  his  birth,  though  there  are  some  who  introduce  him  into  the  world  under  less  favourable 
circumstances,  declaring  that  he  was  the  fruit  of  an  illicit  connexion  between  a  Welsh 
prince  and  (horresco  referens)  a  vestal  virgin.  Such  an  origin  might  be  a  misfortune,  but 
was  no  great  scandal  to  a  man  so  much  the  founder  of  his  own  fame  as  St.  David. 

After  great  preparatory  pomp,  and  much  thunder  and  lightning,  he  was  born  in  the 
year  460,  and  brought  up  at  Old  Menapia,  a  Roman  town,  whose  exact  site  antiquaries 
have  not  resolved  upon,  though  they  have  agreed  that  it  was  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
present  city  of  the  saint.  After  receiving  a  proper  education  he  was  admitted  into  the 
order  of  the  priesthood,  and  became  a  disciple  of  Paulinus  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  under 
whom  he  studied  for  ten  years.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  period  he  was  dismissed,  on  the 
warning  of  an  angel,  to  preach  the  word  among  the  Britons,  and  immediately  went  forth 
and  exerted  himself  with  equal  energy  and  success :  he  then  returned  to  his  native  country, 

Q  and 


116  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  settled  in  the  Valley  of  Roses ;  a  most  unaccountable  misnomer  Giraldus  thinks  for  a 
valley  of  rock,  though  probably  nothing  more  was  intended  than  those  spiritual  flowers 
which  made  a  garden  for  St.  David  wherever  he  trod.  He  here  founded  a  monastery,  and 
soon  collected  about  him  numerous  and  respectable  disciples,  who  cheerfully  obeyed  him 
in  all  things,  though  he  was  very  remarkable  for  the  strictness  of  his  rules  and  the  vigour 
of  his  authority.  The  food  of  his  flock  was  bread  and  herbs,  and  their  drink  water  mixed 
with  milk :  their  clothing  was  the  skins  of  beasts.  They  were  not  permitted  to  eat  the 
bread  of  idleness,  but  addicted  themselves  to  manual  labour  in  the  fields,  and  after  their 
toil  retired  to  their  sparing  meal,  and  then  to  prayer  and  repentance.  No  man  was  allowed 
to  slumber,  or  sneeze,  or  spit  in  church,  or  to  do  any  thing  at  any  time,  however  necessary 
to  be  done,  without  previous  permission  from  the  saint. 

By  this  rigorous  system  of  discipline  St.  David  gained  a  high  reputation  for  sanctity; 
and  having  already  distinguished  himself  for  his  eloquence,  he  was  soon  called  into  a  wider 
field  of  action,  to  fight  for  the  cause  of  the  true  church  against  the  heretical  doctrines  of 
the  Pelagians,  which  had  sprung  up  in  force  at  a  time  when  it  was  supposed  that  they 
had  been  completely  extinguished.  For  this  purpose  he  attended  at  a  national  synod, 
held  at  Brevi,  in  Cardiganshire,  and  there  preached  with  such  cogency  that  the  heresy 
was  at  once  confuted  and  overturned.  As  a  reward  for  this  signal  service  he  was  exalted, 
on  the  resignation  of  St.  Dubricius,  to  the  metropolitan  see  of  Caerleon,  which  he  accepted 
on  condition  that  it  should  be  translated  to  the  Valley  of  Roses,  a  situation  to  which  he 
was  particularly  attached,  both  by  its  seclusion  from  all  the  temptations  of  luxury,  and 
its  security  from  the  invasions  of  the  Saxons.  He  was  moreover  influenced  in  his  choice 
by  his  reverence  for  a  place  that  had  once  been  honoured  by  the  presence  and  preference 
of  St.  Patrick,  who,  after  his  wanderings  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  became  so  ena- 
moured of  this  silent  and  solitary  spot,  that  he  determined  to  devote  to  it  the  remainder 
of  his  life,  and  would  in  all  probability  have  adhered  to  his  determination  had  not  an 
angel  warned  him  that  it  was  reserved  for  St.  David,  not  yet  born,  and  pointed  out  to 
him  the  proper  scene  of  his  exertions  and  his  brightest  fame  among  the  yet  untaught  sons 
of  Ireland. 

Having  thus  briefly  traced  St.  David  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  his  power,  I  shall  not 
follow  him  through  any  of  his  miracles,  but  leave  him  quietly  to  the  honours  of  his 
primacy.  The  exact  time  of  his  death  is  not  known,  but  he  died  at  a  patriarchal  age, 
leaving  a  name  that  was  the  admiration  of  his  country,  and  as  celebrated  for  its  powers 
of  absolving  and  healing  in  the  more  desperate  cases  of  sin  and  sorrow  as  that  of  any  saint 
on  the  calendar. 

Thousands  visited  his  shrine ;  the  fame  of  which  at  length  became  so  exalted  that  it 
was  decided  that  two  pilgrimages  to  it  were  as  efficacious  as  one  to  Rome,  and  this  appre- 
ciation was  very  candidly  confirmed  by  the  pope.  The  names  of  kings  are  recorded 
among  a  host  of  more  humble  votaries.  William  the  Conqueror,  Henry  the  Second,  and 

Edward 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  117 

Edward  the  First,  though  such  visitors  had  little  to  hope  from  the  intercession  of  a  Welsh 
saint,  all  knelt  at  his  shrine. 

These  multiplied  pilgrimages  were  exceedingly  beneficial  to  the  see,  for  all  the  devo- 
tions were  paid  in  hard  money,  and  the  accumulation  was  so  immense,  that  on  the  weekly 
division  of  the  gains  among  the  industrious  priests  they  are  said  to  have  baffled  all  cal- 
culation, and  to  have  been  dealt  out  in  dishes,  each  receiving  at  least  his  dish  full  of  the 
pious  food,  and  some  being  helped  twice  or  thrice,  according  to  their  rank  and  appetite. 

St.  David's,  however,  was  exposed  to  many  terrible  calamities  from  an  early  period 
of  its  history,  for  as  the  fame  of  its  wealth  became  diffused  it  attracted  numerous  rapa- 
cious invaders  to  the  spot,  from  whom  it  had  been  once  hoped  that  its  remoteness  would 
have  secured  it.     In  the  year  810  it  was  first  sacked  and  destroyed  by  the  West-Saxons, 
and  from  this  period  to  the  invasion  of  Wales  by  the  Normans  it  suffered  from  a  rapid 
series  of  depredations  both  by  Saxons  and  Danes  :  in  one  of  their  sacrilegious  attacks  the 
shrine  itself  was  violated,  and  in  another  the  bishop  murdered.     During  the  primacy  of 
Sampson,  the  twenty-fifth  archbishop,  a  plague  burst  out  in  the  diocese,  and  the  mortality 
became  so  alarming  that  the  prelate,  at  the  earnest  intercession  of  his  clergy,  fled  from  his 
post,  and  removed  with  his  pall  to  Dol,  in  Normandy,  where,  on  the  death  of  the  former 
dignitary,  he  was  promoted  to  the  bishopric,  and  in  contradiction  to  the  exact  rule  of 
right,  and  the  lawful  jurisdiction  of  the  Archbishop  of  Tours,  he  exercised  archiepiscopal 
authority,  and  transmitted  it  to  his  successors,  who  long  maintained  their  usurpation. 
St.  David's  remained  divested  of  its  pall  for  many  years,  when  Pope  Eugenius  the  Third, 
taking  advantage  of  its  helplessness  and  nakedness,  subjected  it  to  the  see  of  Canterbury, 
A.  D.  1148.     Notwithstanding  this  ungracious  act  (though,  as  far  as  a  layman  can  judge, 
it  appears  in  the  light  of  no  very  unjust  retribution)  the  Welsh  bishops  refused  to  acknow- 
ledge any  other  head  than  their  old  metropolitan  church,  but  were  speedily  reduced  to 
submission.     Henry  the  First,  in  the  year  1151,  gave  the  last  fatal  blow  to  the  supremacy 
of  St.  David's  by  appointing  Bernard,  a  Norman,  to  the  episcopacy,  in  open  defiance  of 
the  just  rights  of  the  suffragans.     Bernard  was  the  first  foreigner  that  had  ever  worn  this 
British  mitre,  and  he  soon  proved,  by  gross  misconduct,  how  ill  he  deserved  it.     This  mis- 
conduct is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  simple  circumstance  of  his  being  a  foreigner ;  he  was 
not  attached  to  the  soil  by  the  honest  prejudices  of  his  predecessors ;  he  had  not  the  same 
true  and  inborn  reverence  for  the  saint  and  the  spot  where  he  had  lived  and  preached, 
but  considered  himself,  in  the  Valley  of  Roses,  rather  as  a  banished  man,  and  looking 
upon  the  rocks  around  him  with  a  cold,  correct  eye,  saw  nothing  in  them  but  their  naked- 
ness, and  panted  for  nothing  but  translation.      After  shamefully  wasting  the  revenues, 
and  alienating  the  possessions  of  the  see,  he  completed  his  sum  of  injury  by  resigning 
its  metropolitan  privileges,  and  peaceably  acknowledging  the  supreme  jurisdiction  of 
Canterbury. 

Though  St.  David's  thus  lost  all  sterling  power,  it  afterwards  rose  in  a  form  of  far 

more 


118  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BR1TAIX. 

more  external  splendour  than  it  had  ever  assumed  in  the  days  of  its  solid  and  simple 
sway.  In  the  year  1180,  the  old  cathedral,  not  more  infirm  through  age  than  the  numer- 
ous assaults  of  pagan  invaders,  was  pulled  down,  and  the  present  cathedral  built  by  Peter 
de  Leia,  the  nave  of  which  is  supposed  still  to  stand  in  its  original  state. 

In  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Third  Bishop  Gower  erected  his  magnificent  palace,  and 
many  splendid  additions  were  made  to  the  cathedral  by  various  succeeding  bishops  to 
the  time  of  Bishop  Vaughan,  who  died  in  the  year  1521,  and  was  the  last  who  contributed 
towards  the  ornament  of  St.  David's.  No  alterations  were  made  after  this  period  but 
with  a  view  to  its  destruction. 

Bishop  Barlow  was  the  first  positive  plunderer  that  had  appeared  within  the  close 
since  the  northern  savages:  he  had  five  daughters,  whom  he  married  to  five  bishops, 
giving  to  each  of  them  a  ponderous  portion,  accruing  from  the  lead  which  he  stripped 
from  the  palace.  After  committing  many  other  depredations,  he  represented  to  the  pro- 
per authorities  that  the  see  was  in  too  forlorn  and  ruinous  a  state  for  any  remedy  but 
translation,  a  kind  of  palliative  which  Giraldus  says  was  in  his  time  very  highly  thought 
of  by  all  Englishmen  who  were  sent  to  St.  David's.  The  see,  however,  in  spite  of  all  his 
representations,  proved  to  be  immoveable ;  but  he  succeeded  in  changing  the  residence, 
and  fixing  it  near  Caermarthen.  The  same  system  of  robbery  was  carried  on  by  several 
of  his  successors  as  long  as  there  was  any  thing  to  take,  while  Cromwell  destroyed  or 
mutilated  all  that  was  not  worth  taking,  and  the  buildings  were  thus  reduced  to  that 
deplorable  condition  in  which  we  now  see  them. 

In  the  accounts  of  the  ancient  splendour  of  St.  David's  little  mention  is  made  of  the 
state  of  the  city  without  the  close,  and  as  there  is  no  vestige  of  its  remains,  I  think  it 
probable  that  it  was  never  of  any  great  extent  or  consideration.  When  the  bishops  and 
their  clergy  had  their  residence  in  the  diocese  there  must  have  been  employment  for 
labourers  and  artisans,  and  the  town  was  no  doubt  at  that  time  more  extensive  and  better 
appointed  than  at  present ;  but  not  by  consequence,  I  think,  as  some  have  ventured  to 
conclude,  a  large  and  splendid  city.  The  state  of  government,  or  rather  of  anarchy,  that 
prevailed  in  Wales  as  long  as  it  retained  its  independence,  did  not  permit  the  inhabitants 
to  settle  in  extended  societies ;  and  history  proves  that  the  sanctity  of  St.  David's  was 
not  sufficient  to  protect  it  from  the  common  calamities  of  the  times.  The  choice  of  its 
situation  was  first  determined  by  its  seclusion,  and  the  little  temptation  which  it  held  out 
to  Saxon  invasion ;  and  it  is  not  likely  that  this  advantage  should  have  been  immediately 
sacrificed  by  the  establishment  of  a  large  town ;  nor  is  it  more  likely  that  such  a  town 
should  have  sprung  up  when  the  Saxons  and  other  marauders  became  less  active  in  their 
depredations,  for  at  that  period  the  wealth  and  power  of  the  see,  the  great  moving  spring, 
began  to  decline.  Mr.  Fenton,  a  learned  antiquary,  and  born  at  no  great  distance  from 
the  spot,  observes  of  the  present  city,  that  it  still  conveys  to  us  the  outline  of  its  former 
consequence,  and  that  it  is  finely  situated  on  a  sloping  ground.  From  what  I  have  said 

on 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  119 

on  the  subject  it  follows,  either  that  this  description  is  not  very  fairly  applied,  or  that  my 
Saxon  blood  has  in  this  instance  obtunded  my  powers  of  discrimination.  The  same 
gentleman  remarks,  that  the  city  "  was  regularly  laid  out  and  distributed  into  streets, 
lanes,  and  alleys,  dignified  with  names,  such  as  High-street,  New-street,  Nun-street,  Ship- 
street,  Pitt-street,  Philpot-lane,  Whitwell-lane,  &c*."  Presuming  that  these  "  &c."  coming 
at  the  fag-end  of  the  lanes,  having  no  very  comprehensive  signification,  this  illustration 
does  not  militate  very  strongly  against  my  opinion,  and  indeed  attaches  to  St.  David's  a 
modicum  of  splendour  which  I  am  perfectly  willing  to  subscribe  to. 

The  city  has  at  present  only  one  street,  which  has  houses  at  intervals  on  each  side, 
and,  as  I  have  before  said,  of  the  meanest  description.  The  Commercial  Inn,  which  is  a 
structure  of  late  date,  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  an  exception,  but  only  as  to  its  ex- 
terior, for  within  there  is  nothing  but  poverty,  in  its  usual  clothing  of  dirt.  We  had  an 
opportunity  of  judging  of  these  matters  with  more  certainty  than  we  desired,  for  we  were 
obliged  to  stay  and  starve  in  the  neighbourhood  for  two  days.  The  village  is  situated  on 
a  peninsula  near  the  western  extremity  of  Wales,  with  the  sea  at  the  distance  of  less  than 
two  miles  on  every  side  but  the  east ;  and  as  there  is  no  other  town  or  village  in  any 
direction  but  towards  the  east,  there  are  no  roads  for  cars,  and  we  therefore,  by  necessity, 
made  our  excursion  to  the  adjoining  coasts  on  foot,  and  then  returned  to  the  city. 

Following  the  little  river  Alan  to  the  south,  we  arrived  at  Porthclais,  where  it  meets 
the  sea,  winding  through  a  narroAv  inlet  of  the  same  character  as  Solva,  and  like  it  want- 
ing only  a  sprinkling  of  wood  and  brighter  vegetation  among  the  rocks  to  make  it  a 
beautiful  scene.  Porthclais  has  suffered  very  materially  from  the  misfortunes  of  St. 
David's :  it  was  formerly  the  port  where  all  the  exotic  luxuries  for  the  bishop's  table  were 
landed,  and  carried  on  a  brisk  trade  in  these  precious  materials,  but  has  now  only  two  or 
three  sloops,  which  import  limestone  and  culm  for  the  use  of  the  neighbourhood.  We 
proceeded  from  hence  to  Pen-y-Maen  Melin  Point,  which  forms  the  northern  horn  of  St. 
Bride's  Bay.  Opposite  to  it  is  Ramsey  Island,  and  further  to  the  westward  are  some 
large  rocks  at  considerable  intervals  from  each  other,  extending  nearly  in  a  line  for  three 
miles  north  and  south,  and  called,  so  it  pleased  the  facetiousness  of  our  forefathers,  the 
Bishop  and  his  Clerks.  There  is  a  tremendous  race  in  the  sound  between  Ramsey  and 
the  mainland,  the  tide  running  eight  or  nine  knots.  A  fresh  wind  was  blowing  against  the 
tide,  and  the  sea  curled  and  broke  exactly  as  if  passing  over  a  reef  of  rocks,  and  with  the 
same  loud  and  continued  roar.  The  same  kind  of  sea  was  breaking  in  a  long  line  about 
the  rocks  in  the  distance,  and  gave  to  the  whole  coast  a  character  of  indescribable  wild- 
ness.  The  scene  both  over  the  land  and  the  sea  reminded  us  of  the  loneliness  and  savage 
sublimity  of  the  Land's-End. 

Ramsey  is  a  grand,  mountainous  island,  surrounded  by  a  steep  and  craggy  coast. 

*  Historical  Tour  through  Pembrokeshire. 

It 


120  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BUITAIN. 

It  is  about  two  miles  and  a  half  in  length,  and  one  in  breadth,  in  its  broadest  part :  it  has 
some  arable  and  pasture  land,  but  the  produce,  like  that  of  all  the  islands  on  this  coast, 
is  scanty.  The  herbage  is  said  to  be  very  sweet,  and  mixed  with  wild  thyme,  the  effect 
of  which  was  so  beneficial  to  the  cheese  formerly  made  on  the  island  that  it  became  cele- 
brated throughout  the  country,  and  bore  the  highest  price  in  the  markets.  The  island 
has  of  late  years  suffered  a  great  and  irremediable  calamity  by  the  invasion  of  rats,  which 
ever  since  their  arrival  have  persevered  in  a  system  of  such  fierce  and  unrelenting  perse- 
cution against  the  rabbits  that  the  race  is  nearly  extinct. 

In  the  early  ages  of  Christianity  Ramsey  was  peopled  by  saints  and  monks,  who 
there  lived  free  from  all  interruption  from  without,  but  not  always  on  the  most  peaceable 
terms  among  themselves.  The  purest  spring  of  water  in  the  island,  according  to  legend- 
ary story,  spouted  up  from  the  spot  where  the  bleeding  head  of  St.  Justinian  fell  when  it 
was  struck  off  by  his  murderers.  He  was  a  native  of  Britany,  but  came  over  to  end  his 
days  in  Ramsey,  where  he  soon  became  celebrated  for  his  sanctity ;  but  was  so  intolerably 
harsh  in  the  exercise  of  his  authority  that  his  disciples  rose  in  rebellion  and  cut  off  his 
head.  All  the  atonement  that  was  possible  was  made  to  him  for  this  barbarous  act  by 
burying  him  in  the  same  tomb  with  St.  David. 

Our  course  from  Pen-y-Maen  Melin  Point  lay  to  the  northward,  along  a  coast  not 
lofty,  but  rocky  and  steep,  and  fretted  by  the  violence  of  the  tides  into  an  endless  variety 
of  forms.  The  country  to  our  right  was  gloomy  and  desolate,  with  no  traces  of  cultiva- 
tion or  the  care  of  man  except  stone  walls,  and  most  of  these  were  in  ruins.  Our  view 
to  the  north  was  bounded  by  St.  David's  Head,  a  majestic  crag  which  towers  far  above 
every  other  part  of  this  melancholy  region,  and  is  covered  at  the  summit  with  vast  piles 
of  grey  rock.  We  paused  at  St.  Justinian's  chapel,  the  only  one  which  now  remains  of 
many  that  were  formerly  scattered  about  the  coast,  most  of  them  dedicated  to  saints,  and 
forming  little  subsidiary  corners  of  grace  for  those  who  were  not  satisfied  with  the  single 
intercession  of  St.  David.  They  were  all  situated  near  the  creeks  and  landing-places  at 
the  sea-side,  to  court  the  devotion  of  seamen  before  they  trusted  themselves  to  the  sea, 
or  when  they  returned  in  safety  from  it.  The  offerings  at  these  outposts  were  added  to 
those  in  the  great  depot  of  the  cathedral,  and  filled  many  a  dish  for  the  Saturday  night's 
supper  of  the  priests*.  St.  Justinian's  chapel  was  built  by  Bishop  Vaughan :  the  roof  is 
destroyed,  but  the  walls  remain,  from  which  it  appears  to  have  been  a  plain  building, 
more  for  use  than  show. 

About  a  mile  to  the  northward  of  the  chapel  we  entered  upon  a  sandy  tract,  called 
the  Burrows,  with  nothing  very  interesting  on  the  surface,  but  with  abundance  of  food  for 
curiosity  beneath  it.  On  the  morning  of  the  28th  of  June,  1808,  two  antiquaries  started 
from  St.  David's  to  find  out  the  old  Roman  city  of  Menapia,  but  not  discovering,  after  a 

*  History  of  the  Welsh  Cathedrals,  by  Browne  Willis. 

most 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  121 

most  arduous  search,  a  single  vestige  above  ground,  they  agreed,  on  the  most  mature 
deliberation,  that  it  lay  buried  under  the  sand  of  the  Burrows,  immediately  above  a  sandy 
bay,  bounded  to  the  north  by  St.  David's  Head.  This  certainly  may  have  been  its  situa- 
tion, but  it  seems  scarcely  necessary  to  have  had  recourse  to  any  extraordinary  effort  of 
nature  for  its  destruction,  seeing  that  the  modern  Menapia  has  been  so  little  able  to 
withstand  the  common  casualties  of  time.  The  invasions  of  the  Saxons  and  the  Danes, 
so  frequently  directed  against  St.  David's,  appear  fully  adequate  to  account  for  the  dis- 
appearance of  Old  Menapia.  But  the  question  is  more  within  the  province  of  the  spade 
than  any  other  mode  of  research,  and  I  leave  it  to  those  who  have  ardour  and  industry 
enough  to  dig  through  it. 

We  ascended  to  the  summit  of  St.  David's  Head,  which  rises  in  a  lofty  peak,  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  extreme  point  of  the  cape,  and  from  thence  had  a  magnifi- 
cent view  over  the  sea,  stretched  out  in  boundless  extent  on  every  side  but  the  east.  In 
St.  Bride's  Bay  to  the  south,  and  in  the  channel  to  the  north,  it  appeared,  from  the 
eminence  on  which  we  stood,  to  be  perfectly  smooth ;  but  to  the  west  it  was  "  raging 
white,"  and  rebounding  from  the  rocks  in  columns  of  foam.  We  had  likewise  a  view  of  con- 
siderable extent  over  the  land,  but  could  see  no  boundary  to  its  barrenness.  We  were  now 
at  the  verge  of  the  peninsula  which  forms  the  most  western  part  of  Wales,  projecting  eight 
miles  into  the  sea  from  the  line  of  coast  on  each  side  of  it.  Its  breadth  at  the  eastern 
extremity  is  about  six  miles,  but  it  tapers  gradually  towards  the  west,  and  at  the  opposite 
extremity  is  scarcely  three  miles  across.  Its  complete  exposure  accounts  for  its  sterility, 
but  whether  this  might  in  any  degree  be  reclaimed  by  a  skilful  system  of  agriculture  is 
yet  to  be  tried. 

Among  the  masses  of  rock  that  are  scattered  about  St.  David's  Head  it  is  said  that 
there  are  some  Druidical  remains,  and  certainly  no  place  could  be  more  in  harmony  with 
the  gloomiest  rites  of  superstition.  As  we  descended  we  looked  narrowly  for  some  of  these 
remains,  but  nature  has  been  so  bountiful  to  this  mountain  in  the  covering  of  rocks,  and 
so  various  in  her  arrangement  of  them,  that  we  feared  to  trust  our  judgment  in  deciding 
between  her  works  and  those  of  the  Druids.  We  saw  no  cromlechs,  nor  any  other  struc- 
ture self-evidently  artificial,  though  in  this  chaos  of  rocks  there  may  have  been  some  which 
escaped  our  observation.  We  walked  for  a  few  miles  to  the  eastward  of  St.  David's 
Head  without  meeting  any  thing  remarkable,  a  circumstance  indeed  which  might  have 
occurred  to  us  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  then  returned  to  St.  David's. 

As  we  understood  that  there  was  some  intricacy  in  the  roads  leading  from  hence,  we 
determined  to  take  a  guide,  for  our  young  driver  had  by  this  time  honesty  enough  to  con- 
fess that  such  an  assistant  was  not  altogether  superfluous.  Neither  man  nor  boy  could 
be  found  in  the  village  for  this  service,  but  a  young  strapping  girl  was  introduced  to  us, 
who  looked  fully  equal  to  the  task  of  being  not  only  a  guide  but  a  protector.  Our  gal- 
lantry felt  a  little  alarmed  at  the  idea  of  permitting  a  woman  to  trudge  before  us,  but  our 

scruples 


123  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

scruples  on  this  account  were  soon  overruled  by  our  landlord,  who  assured  us  that  we 
were  relieving  her  from  a  much  more  laborious  employment,  and  at  a  considerable  advance 
of  wages.  She  could  not  speak  a  word  of  English ;  but  as  we  required  in  her  nothing 
more  than  a  finger-post,  we  did  not  consider  this  as  an  objection.  The  Welsh  women  are 
all  remarkably  healthy,  and  have  an  appearance  of  immense  strength.  They  are  generally 
short,  but  very  broad,  and  contain  perhaps  more  square  feet  than  the  tallest  of  the  sex:  a 
file  of  female  infantry  in  Wales  would,  I  imagine,  cover  as  much  ground  as  an  equal 
number  of  men  from  any  regiment  in  the  service.  In  Pembrokeshire  they  are  particularly 
distinguished  for  their  plumpness,  which  is  said  to  result  from  the  mild  and  wholesome 
temperature  of  the  climate.  In  the  hundred  of  St.  David's  an  apothecary  could  never, 
with  all  his  exertions,  support  himself  by  his  profession ;  and  it  was  thought  necessary  to 
attach  some  ecclesiastical  preferment  to  the  practice  of  physic,  in  order  to  induce  a  medical 
gentleman  to  settle  in  this  inhospitable  district*. 

We  travelled  over  a  dreary  tract  of  eight  miles  from  St.  David's  to  Abercastle,  a 
small  village,  where  there  was  just  enough  of  life  and  action  to  diversify  the  dullness  of 
our  way,  but  little  that  is  worthy  to  be  reported.  The  sea  flows  up  to  the  village  through 
a  narrow  creek,  which  affords  a  harbour  for  small  vessels.  The  entrance  is  between  lofty 
and  precipitous  cliffs,  which  present  a  very  grand  display  of  jagged  rocks.  On  the  east 
side  there  is  a  small  island  with  a  mound  of  earth  on  the  summits,  called  the  Grave  of 
Sampson's  Finger.  To  mention  nothing  but  the  name  of  this  singular  tumulus  is,  I 
acknowledge,  very  unsatisfactory,  but  it  is  all  that  is  known  on  the  spot,  and  I  merely 
give  it  as  a  clue  to  conjecture. 

We  remained  but  a  short  time  at  Abercastle,  and  in  our  journey  from  thence  to  Fish- 
guard  we  observed  nothing  that  requires  particular  notice.  The  general  appearance  of 
the  inland  country  was  still  cold  and  bald ;  but  we  occasionally  saw  a  field  of  corn,  which 
if  it  did  not  yield  much  of  the  picturesque,  at  least  gave  a  comfortable  promise  of  quartern 
loaves.  The  want  of  trees  and  verdure  has  not  the  same  mournful  effect  immediately  on 
the  coast  as  in  the  interior :  we  are  not  accustomed  to  these  ornaments  on  the  coast,  and 
they  give  way  to  a  new  order  of  scenery,  possessing  many  charms  in  compensation.  If 
the  land  be  not  embellished  with  vegetation  it  is  infinitely  diversified  in  its  outline,  and 
with  the  rocks  in  all  their  fantastic  detail,  and  the  majestic  sea  spotted  with  ships  and 
boats,  constitutes  a  scene  that  is  always  interesting. 

The  road  by  which  we  entered  Fishguard  was  of  a  ruder  kind  than  any  that  we  had 
yet  passed,  and  was  only  to  be  transcended  by  the  streets  of  the  town,  which,  as  I  have 
since  found,  are  proverbially  bad  :  "  as  rough  as  Fishguard  streets,"  is  an  hyperbole  fre- 
quently employed  in  describing  the  most  impracticable  roads  about  the  country.  The 
town  is  considered  as  the  most  extensive  and  populous  of  any  in  the  county,  excepting 

*  Manby's  History  of  St.  David's. 

Haverford 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  125 

Haverford  West,  and  in  some  of  its  departments  is  just  struggling  into  improvement, 
and  rising  above  those  prejudices  against  cleanliness  and  decent  order,  which,  if  former 
tourists  have  not  done  it  injustice,  once  reigned  despotic  over  the  whole  place.  It  is 
only  in  one  street  that  this  infant  reformation  is  visible,  and  in  that  only  partially.  The 
most  imposing  object  here  is  the  inn,  where  we  were  very  well  accommodated  in  every 
respect.  We  had  been  warned  by  our  itinerary  to  fortify  ourselves  against  the  worst,  and 
therefore  were  likely  to  attach  an  undue  value  to  common  advantages;  but  I  am  still  in- 
clined to  think  that  we  met  with  more  comfort  and  cleanliness  in  this  little  inn  than  in 
any  other  which  we  visited  in  Wales.  These  are  rather  diminutive  remarks,  but  they  are 
a  tribute  of  justice  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Williams,  the  innkeepers  at  Fishguard,  and  may  serve 
to  chronicle  the  march  of  civilization.  Adjoining  the  inn  is  a  shop,  the  only  one  of  any 
account  which  I  noticed  in  the  town,  but  which  is  itself  an  emporium  for  every  thing  you 
want.  Mr.  Williams  is  the  proprietor  of  this  miscellaneous  and  well-stocked  repository, 
and  in  short  I  consider  him  as  quite  the  Peter  the  Great  of  the  place. 

In  the  other  streets  the  inhabitants  are  more  tenacious  of  their  prescriptive  rights,  more 
obstinate  in  their  scruples  on  the  question  of  reform,  and  have  not  yet  sacrificed  their 
dunghills  to  any  fanciful  system  of  innovation — probably  these  are  old  sober  people,  who 
are  settled  in  their  opinions,  or  at  least  unwilling  to  do  any  thing  in  a  hurry,  and 
wish  to  see  the  effect  of  change  upon  their  neighbours  under  a  longer  course  of  experience 
before  they  venture  to  follow  the  example. 

The  church,  as  is  not  unfrequent  in  Wales,  is  one  of  the  meanest  and  dirtiest  buildings 
in  the  town :  it  has  no  spire,  nor  any  other  distinction  to  denote  its  character  except  the 
burying  ground,  which  adjoins  the  market-place,  and  is  made  the  common  dunghill  for 
the  multifarious  refuse  of  fish,  flesh,  and  vegetables.  People  may  perhaps  be  as  ardent 
and  honest  in  their  devotions  here  as  in  a  cleaner  place,  but  there  is  something  very 
offensive  to  common  feeling  in  this  irreverent  treatment  of  religious  buildings,  and  from 
which  a  foreigner  at  least  might  be  disposed  to  draw  some  very  harsh  conclusions. 
There  is  a  meeting-house  for  Baptists,  and  another  for  Jumpers,  who  form  the  largest 
portion  of  the  population,  which  amounts  to  about  two  thousand. 

The  town  is  built  on  a  lofty  eminence,  immediately  above  the  sea,  and  the  airiness  of 
its  situation  lias  prevailed  over  its  aggregate  of  filth,  and  taken  from  the  inhabitants  one 
motive  to  cleanliness  by  permitting  them  to  enjoy  their  dirt  in  uninterrupted  health. 
There  is  a  road  cut  in  the  rock  down  the  front  of  the  cliff,  forming  a  desperate  kind  of 
descent,  which  leads  to  the  harbour.  Here,  at  the  water's  edge,  is  a  lower  town,  consisting 
of  twenty  or  thirty  houses,  inhabited  by  fishermen  and  other  seafaring  people,  who, 
I  think,  are  disposed  to  side  with  the  reformists.  The  upper  town  is  seen  to  great 
advantage  from  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  and  we  were  amazingly  struck  with  the  romantic 
rudeness  of  its  situation,  with  which  it  corresponds  most  harmoniously  in  all  its  parts.  There 
is  a  beauty  in  expediency,  but  there  is  likewise  a  beauty  in  the  reverse ;  and  the  palpable 

R  inconveniences 


124  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN, 

inconveniences  and  uncouthness  of  this  town,  and  the  rugged  pass  leading  to  it,  would,  in 
my  opinion,  judging  merely  as  a  looker  on,  be  ill  exchanged  for  parallel  streets  and  turn- 
pike roads.  There  is  a  double  view  of  most  things :  the  first  impression  of  Fishguard  is 
that  of  a  surprise,  and  an  agreeable  one ;  nor  is  it  till  one  sits  down  soberly  and  honestly 
to  declare  whether  the  town  is  ill  or  well  built,  or  clean  or  dirty,  that  any  of  those  dis- 
agreeable details  present  themselves,  which  I  have  already  commemorated. 

The  harbour  is  formed  by  the  estuary  of  the  river  Gwayn,  and,  excepting  Milford  Haven, 
is  infinitely  the  best  that  we  had  yet  seen  on  the  Welsh  coast.  Unlike  most  harbours 
at  the  mouths  of  rivers,  it  has  no  bar,  and  is  entirely  free  from  all  other  obstructions.  It 
is  capacious  and  easy  of  access,  and  has  abundance  of  water  for  coasting  vessels  of  the 
largest  class.  The  entrance  is  nearly  four  hundred  yards  wide.  It  is  situated  in  the 
farthest  recess  of  a  deep  bay,  the  shores  of  which  protect  it  from  every  wind  but  the  north 
and  north-east,  and  this  exposure  might  be  very  readily  obviated  by  the  construction  of  a 
pier.  Almost  all  the  harbours  on  the  Welsh  coast  are  so  blocked  up  by  sand  or  obstructed 
by  rocks  that  the  bay  and  harbour  of  Fishguard  are  of  the  utmost  importance  to  all  vessels 
navigating  St.  George's  Channel;  and  their  importance  has  been  so  well  understood,  that, 
in  the  year  1790,  the  Board  of  Admiralty  appointed  a  gentleman,  Mr.  Spence,  to  make  a 
survey  of  them,  and  an  estimate  of  the  expenses  that  would  be  required  for  the  erection 
of  a  proper  pier.  The  survey  was  made,  and  the  expenses  were  estimated  at  14,785/. 
18s.  5d.  but  nothing  further  was  done,  and  the  harbour  has  at  present  only  a  very  small 
pier,  which  is  utterly  inadequate  to  its  protection.  Numerous  wrecks,  particularly  of 
vessels  from  Ireland,  occur  along  this  line  of  coast,  and  are  attributed  to  the  circumstance 
of  there  being  no  secure  harbour  to  the  northward  of  Milford  Haven  for  which  vessels  can 
run,  if  prevented  by  strong  southerly  winds  from  getting  round  St.  David's  Head  and  the 
Smalls,  when  bound  to  that  port.  The  natural  advantages  of  Fishguard  bay  and  harbour, 
and  their  capability  of  improvement,  are  very  clearly  made  out  by  Mr.  Spence,  and  as  I 
think  they  cannot  be  too  often  insisted  upon,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  quoting  them  in  his 
words.  "  Were  a  proper  pier  made  at  Fishguard,  all  ships  in  the  south  part  of  the  Irish 
Channel,  when  forced  by  gales  of  southerly  or  westerly  winds  to  bear  away  for  a  harbour, 
might  safely  run  for  Fishguard  Road,  when  they  cannot  fetch  Milford  ;  and  the  packets 
from  Waterford  would  have  the  peculiar  advantage  of  the  choice  of  two  ports  to  put  into 
as  the  wind  would  serve  ;  for  if  it  blew  so  strong  from  the  south  as  to  make  it  difficult  to 
reach  Milford,  they  could  easily  run  up  St.  George's  Channel,  and  put  into  Fishguard. 
To  give  a  general  idea  of  the  situation  of  Fishguard  Bay  and  its  advantages  ;  it  lies  within 
the  Irish  Channel,  and  is  the  next  northernmost  place  of  safety  to  Milford  Haven,  of 
course  the  nearest  road  for  ships  outward  bound,  who  cannot  get  round  St.  David's  Head 
and  the  Smalls ;  nor  is  there  any  place  besides  that  large  vessels  can  safely  run  for  except 
Stud  wall's  Road,  which  is  seventeen  leagues  farther  to  the  northward  or  to  leeward.  But 
Fishguard  Road  is  also  sheltered  from  southerly  and  south-east  winds,  whereas  Stud  wall's 

Road 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  125 

Road  is  not;  and  should  the  wind  suddenly  shift  to  the  north-eastward,  while  they  are  in 
Fishguard  Bay,  so  as  to  make  their  lying  there  dangerous,  they  have  only  to  run  into  the 
proposed  pier  at  Fishguard,  where  they  will  be  safe  from  all  winds  and  weather.  The 
extent  of  Fishguard  Bay,  from  east  to  west,  is  about  three  miles,  and  from  north  to  south 
about  one  mile  and  three  quarters,  and  the  general  depth  of  water  is  from  thirty  to  seventy 
feet,  according  to  the  distance  from  the  shore,  which  is  bold  all  round.  The  quality  of  the 
bottom  all  over  the  bay  is  sand,  mixed  with  mud  a  little  below  the  surface,  which  holds 
well,  so  that  ships  of  the  largest  size  may  anchor  in  all  parts  of  it  with  south-east,  southerly 
and  westerly  winds  in  perfect  safety." 

The  trade  of  Fishguard  is  not  very  extensive :  its  exports  are  supplied  by  the  farmers 
of  the  neighbourhood,  and  consist  principally  of  oats ;  its  imports  are  coal,  culm,  limestone, 
timber,  and  a  few  other  materials  for  the  use  of  the  town  and  the  surrounding  country.  It 
has  no  manufactures  of  any  kind,  the  occupations  and  the  rewards  of  fishing  and  smuggling 
having  through  a  long  succession  of  generations  satisfied  the  moderate  ambition  of  its 
simple  inhabitants.  The  latter  business  is,  I  understand,  on  the  decline ;  but  fishing  con- 
tinues to  be  the  chief  support  of  the  town.  The  bay  is  well  stored  with  turbot,  soles,  and 
other  excellent  fish  ;  but  the  people  are  careless  of  this  choicer  game,  and  give  their  whole 
attention  to  the  herrings.  They  do  not  cure  any  for  exportation,  the  demand  of  the  town 
and  the  neighbouring  villages  being  fully  equal  to  the  whole  supply. 

Fishguard  is  a  town  of  considerable  antiquity ;  but  it  is  not  the  more  interesting  on 
that  account,  for  I  find  nothing  of  early  story  connected  with  it  that  is  in  any  degree 
more  impressive  than  its  present  business  of  catching  and  eating  herrings.  An  event  of 
late  occurrence  recommends  it  more  powerfully  to  the  notice  of  the  traveller :  it  was  close 
to  Fishguard  that  fourteen  hundred  French  troops  landed  under  General  Tate,  and  we  of 
course  felt  some  curiosity  in  hearing  all  the  particulars  of  the  invasion  from  people  who 
were  eye-Avitnesses  to  it,  and  who  could  point  out  to  us  the  places  rendered  memorable  by 
the  operations  of  the  enemy.  We  were  as  much  as  possible  made  actors  in  the  living 
scene,  by  having  all  its  parts  unfolded  to  us  in  the  order  and  in  the  places  in  which  they 
successively  happened ;  but  they  are  scarcely  of  sufficient  importance  to  have  any  effect 
in  description.  It  was  in  the  morning  of  the  20th  February,  1797,  that  the  people  of  the 
town  discovered  three  large  ships  approaching  the  coast;  and  as  the  weather  was  perfectly 
calm,  they  at  first  imagined  them  to  be  Liverpool  merchantmen  about  to  bring  up  till  the 
return  of  a  breeze.  As  they  drew  nearer,  however,  they  were  made  out  to  be  men  of  war, 
and  the  strangeness  of  their  conduct  immediately  raised  a  suspicion  of  their  design.  When 
within  about  a  mile  of  the  land  they  '  laid  to/  the  troops  began  to  descend  from  their 
sides  into  the  boats,  and  there  was  no  longer  a  doubt  that  they  were  enemies,  and  that  their 
purpose  was  invasion.  The  terror  that  ensued  upon  this  discovery  was  great  and  universal; 
it  soon  magnified  the  numbers  of  the  invaders  into  ten  times  more  than  the  number  of 
vessels  in  sight  could  have  transported,  and  fixed  a  general  persuasion  that  they  could  not 

pcssibly 


126  VOYAGE    KOUNI5    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

possibly  have  any  other  object  than  to  murder  every  living  creature  in  the  land.  Thus 
assured,  the  people  all  hurried  away  to  the  hills  and  concealed  themselves  among  the  rocks 
and  furze  brakes,  and  before  the  enemy  had  reached  the  shore  every  house  in  Fishguard 
was  deserted. 

The  French  landed  about  two  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  east  point  of  Fishguard 
Bay,  on  a  most  rugged  and  impracticable  shore,  which  one  should  have  supposed  to  have 
been  sufficiently  defended  by  nature  against  all  power  of  invasion.  It  was  not  without 
difficulty  that  we  descended  down  the  steep  and  slippery  cliff  to  the  rocks  below;  yet  up 
these  heights  the  French,  though  weakened  by  long  fasting  and  the  fatigues  of  a  sea 
voyage,  dragged  all  their  stores  and  ammunition,  and  by  midnight  had  fixed  their  camp  on 
a  small  plain  above.  Men  in  a  better  condition  would  never  have  made  their  attempt  on 
such  a  spot,  but  these  were  in  a  state  of  desperation ;  they  had  been  for  some  time  on  an 
allowance  of  provisions  scarcely  sufficient  to  support  life,  and  the  first  sight  of  land  and 
its  promise  of  relief  gave  them  extraordinary  spirits  and  power. 

From  the  moment  of  their  landing  to  that  of  their  surrender  they  acted  without  system 
of  any  kind,  and  found  themselves  encamped  in  a  hostile  country  before  they  had  fixed 
their  intentions  or  formed  their  plans.  If  they  had  marched  directly  to  Fishguard  they 
would  have  found  the  houses  empty  to  receive  them,  nor  in  the  first  confusion  created  by 
their  appearance  was  there  any  thing  to  have  prevented  their  penetrating  much  farther 
into  the  country.  But  they  probably  foresaw  the  certainty  of  their  ultimate  fate  before 
they  left  their  ships,  and  were  unwilling  to  exasperate  the  country  against  them  by  a  use- 
less trespass.  Their  first  consideration  was  to  satisfy  their  hunger,  and  for  this  purpose 
they  divided  themselves  into  small  parties,  and  gutted  all  the  cottages  of  a  little  village 
called  Lanwnda,  at  a  short  distance  from  their  camp.  We  were  conducted,  in  the  proper 
order  of  events,  to  the  first  house  which  was  invaded,  and  which,  being  the  largest  and 
most  opulent  of  the  village,  furnished  an  extraordinary  supply  :  among  other  articles  were 
eight  geese  and  eight  pounds  of  butter,  which  the  party  boiled  up  together,  and  several  of 
them  feasted  on  this  mixture  so  intemperately  that  they  died  in  consequence  of  their 
excess.  These  facts  were  communicated  to  us  by  various  people  of  the  neighbourhood, 
and  were  ascertained,  we  were  informed,  by  the  confession  of  some  of  the  party  concerned 
who  survived  this  terrible  stew. 

The  French  on  this  occasion,  saving  their  reckless  waste  of  the  poultry,  did  not  com- 
mit any  wanton  barbarities;  and  though  they  did  not  leave  a  meal  for  a  mouse  in  any  house 
which  they  visited,  yet  they  destroyed  nothing  which  they  could  not  eat.  How  the  Ge- 
neral disposed  of  himself  during  this  memorable  night  I  am  not  informed,  but  he  does  not 
appear  to  have  taken  any  great  concern  in  his  proper  business,  or  at  least  he  concerned 
himself  with  very  little  effect.  When  the  morning  dawned  no  preparations  had  been 
made  for  the  advance  of  his  troops,  nor  were  any  evidences  shewn  that  they  had  any 
design  in  their  visit  to  Great  Britain.  The  people  of  Fishguard,  finding  themselves  so 

long 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  127 

long  unmolested,  began  to  resume  their  courage,  and  at  this  period  of  the  transactions  a 
feat  of  heroism  is  recorded  which  is  still  looked  upon  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  not  un- 
justly, as  the  most  signal  that  occurred  in  any  stage  of  the  invasion.  It  relates  to  an  old 
woman,  who  imagining  that  she  had  little  to  fear  from  invaders,  and  impelled  by  a  strong 
feeling  of  curiosity,  wandered  from  the  town,  that  she  might  have  a  nearer  view  of  the 
enemy ;  in  about  an  hour  she  returned,  and  to  the  utter  astonishment  of  the  inhabitants, 
in  company  with  a  French  soldier  whom  she  had  taken  prisoner,  and  who  had  been  found 
willing  to  exchange  his  liberty  for  a  promise  of  food  and  shelter. 

In  the  course  of  this  day  a  regular  force  was  collected  to  oppose  the  enemy,  consist- 
ing of  fencibles  and  a  troop  of  cavalry,  but  not  amounting  to  more  than  seven  hundred 
men.  Lord  Cawdor  put  himself  at  their  head  and  marched  boldly  forwards,  followed  at 
a  little  distance  by  a  large  body  of  women,  all  anxiously  trembling  for  their  husbands, 
fathers,  and  brothers.  The  French  were  now  in  motion,  and  were  seen  winding  in  single 
file  down  a  rugged  hill,  and  bending  their  course  towards  Fishguard.  They  halted  on 
Goodwich  Sands,  a  fine  level  plain,  distant  a  little  more  than  a  mile  from  the  town :  the 
British  troops  were  almost  within  musket-shot  on  some  heights  above,  and  a  bloody  and 
desperate  struggle  was  anticipated,  when  the  affair  was  suddenly  and  most  unexpectedly 
terminated  by  the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  French.  It  is  confidently  asserted,  that 
the  cause  of  their  yielding  to  so  inferior  a  force  was  this  :  the  women  in  the  rear  were  all 
clad,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  in  red  woollen  shawls,  called  Whittles,  and 
these,  together  with  their  black  beaver  hats,  gave  them  not  only  a  masculine  but  a  very 
martial  appearance ;  the  French  mistook  them  for  a  reserve  of  troops,  and  immediately 
gave  up  the  contest  in  despair. 

The  prisoners  were  all  confined  in  the  church  of  Fishguard,  the  only  place  in  which 
they  could  be  properly  secured,  and  from  whence  there  was  not  the  slightest  apprehension 
of  their  taking  away  any  thing  valuable.  They  were  soon  removed  to  other  quarters,  and 
departed  without  leaving  any  traces  of  serious  injury  in  any  one  scene  of  their  hostilities; 
an  extraordinary  circumstance  in  the  history  of  an  invading  army,  and  particular!}'  of  an 
army  of  Frenchmen.  They  left,  however,  a  very  strong  impression  on  the  minds  of  the 
people,  who  considering  themselves,  in  spite  of  their  late  escape,  as  a  devoted  race,  were 
long  subject  to  continual  alarms,  and  invariably  regarded  all  strangers  as  enemies  coming 
for  the  express  purpose  of  plotting  some  new  and  more  effectual  attack.  Thus,  at  least,  the 
fact  has  been  represented  by  several  successive  tourists,  who  have  complained  of  having 
marched  through  life  without  any  stain  upon  their  patriotism  but  of  driving  into  Fish- 
guard  under  the  horrible  stigma  of  being  spies.  These  fears  and  jealousies  of  the  country 
must  either  have  been  exaggerated  or  have  subsided;  for  though  we  were  seen  prying 
about  the  neighbourhood  under  very  suspicious  appearances,  making  the  coast  the  peculiar 
object  of  our  attention,  and  with  pencils  and  paper  visibly  in  our  possession,  yet  we  had 
not  the  least  reason  to  conclude  that  we  were  looked  upon  as  traitors. 

s  Goodwich 


128  VOYAGF.  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Goodwich  Sands,  independent  of  the  space  which  they  occupied  in  the  story  of  the 
invasion,  presented  some  other  matter  of  attraction  to  our  notice.  At  the  north  end  of 
them,  and  near  the  base  of  a  high  and  rocky  cape,  called  Penainglas,  which  forms  the  western 
point  of  Fishguard  Bay,  there  is  a  pretty  little  village  with  a  sprinkling  of  wood  about  it, 
a  phenomenon  in  this  part  of  the  world,  in  itself  quite  a  feast  for  curiosity.  The  trees 
are  sheltered  by  the  high  land  from  the  west  wind,  and  the  same  kind  skreen  extends  its. 
protection  to  some  small  gardens,  which  are  notorious  for  bringing  forth  earlier  cabbages 
than  any  other  nursery  round  the  country,  and  on  this  account  have  been  styled,  in  the 
bold  language  of  a  native  author,  the  Battersea  of  Fishguard.  The  place  did  not  suggest 
to  our  eyes  an  image  of  so  much  luxuriance,  and  yet  all  that  there  was  of  vegetation  was 
fully  enforced  by  the  contrast  of  the  rude  hills  rising  up  in  horrid  nakedness  immediately 
behind.  But  though  we  owned  nothing  that  could  reasonably  remind  us  of  Battersea,  yet 
we  were  by  no  means  insensible  to  the  fair  pretensions  of  Goodwich:  the  cottages  and 
the  patches  of  gardens,  and  the  small  account  of  foliage,  were  all  so  nicely  disposed  and 
blended  and  so  happily  relieved  by  the  rugged  and  overhanging  rocks,  that  I  do  not 
remember  to  have  seen  any  thing  of  coast  scenery  more  strikingly  beautiful  and  romantic. 

The  village  is  tenanted  by  fishermen,  but  owes  its  principal  dwelling-house  and  the 
embellishment  of  its  best  plantations  to  an  individual  who  settled  here  some  years  ago, 
with  a  view,  as  he  professed,  of  escaping  from  the  cares  and  noise  of  public  life :  but  care 
soon  found  him  out  in  his  retreat  in  the  form  of  a  posse  of  custom-house  officers,  who  very 
barbarously,  as  the  neighbours  asserted,  broke  in  upon  his  privacy,  because  he  had  thought 
proper  to  enliven  it  by  carrying  on,  in  a  quiet  way,  a  little  trade  in  smuggling.  Since  this 
event  the  house  has  remained  empty,  but  still  offers  a  happy  retreat  to  any  one  who  can 
make  privacy,  a  sea  prospect,  and  fresh  herrings,  the  sole  articles  of  his  happiness,  without 
interfering  with  contraband  practices. 

The  fishermen  have  a  small  harbour  for  their  boats,  defended  by  a  rude  pier,  and 
both  the  pier  and  the  boats  contribute  not  a  little  to  the  general  sum  of  the  picturesque. 
The  herrings  had  just  appeared  on  the  coast,  and  since  the  French  appeared  there,  Good- 
wich, perhaps,  had  never  exhibited  a  scene  of  more  bustle  and  anxiety  than  at  the  time  of 
our  visit.  The  success  of  the  herring  season  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  people, 
for  herrings  form  a  material  part  of  their  subsistence  thoughout  the  year.  On  the  first  ap- 
pearance of  a  shoal  the  interest  of  the  country  round  is  immediately  alarmed,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  first  night  of  adventure,  the  returning  boats  are  hailed  by  an  impatient 
crowd  on  the  strand,  and  the  number  of  herrings  caught  by  John  Morgan's  or  William 
Jones's  boat  are  noised  about  the  country  with  as  much  eagerness  as  the  news  of  an  Ex- 
traordinary Gazette.  The  herrings  usually  appear  on  this  coast  at  the  latter  end  of  August, 
and  the  season  lasts  for  a  month  or  five  weeks. 

On  leaving  Fishguard  we  proceeded  for  some  time  without  finding  any  thing  to  keep 
attention  awake,  except  the  badness  of  our  road ;  and  every  mile  that  we  advanced  was 

certainly 


Goodwych  Pier,  near  Fishguard,  Pembrokeshire 


View  near  Aberystwith,  Cardiganshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  129 

certainly  no  mean  triumph  of  our  spirit,  patience,  and  perseverance.  There  was  no  other 
road  open  to  us  but  the  main  road  communicating  between  Fishguard  and  Cardigan, 
which  one  might  have  expected  to  find  in  a  little  better  order;  but  the  economy  of  the 
highways  is  yet  but  a  novel  study  in  this  part  of  the  world,  where,  as  indeed  is  the  case  in 
other  places,  and  in  affairs  of  greater  moment,  matters  of  general  and  palpable  convenience 
have  to  struggle  for  some  time  longer  with  the  scruples  of  prescriptive  indolence  or  resolute 
ignorance.  One  might  possibly  convince  those  who  have  the  charge  of  these  concerns 
that  their  mode  of  mending  the  roads  is  a  bad  one,  but  the  day  is  not  yet  arrived  when 
they  can  be  moved  to  alter  it.  This  same  kind  of  complaint  has  been  renewed  at  intervals 
by  tourist  after  tourist,  each  of  whom  has  once  in  his  life  stumbled  and  grumbled  over  the 
same  ground,  and  we  who  bring  up  the  rear  in  this  line  of  march  have  at  least  as  good  a 
chance  of  stumbling  and  as  fair  a  pretence  for  grumbling  as  he  who  led  the  way. 

After  travelling  for  about  an  hour  we  quitted  our  car,  and  proceeded  by  a  road  not 
to  be  approached  in  a  car  to  the  summit  of  Dinas  Head,  which  forms  the  eastern  point  of 
Fishgtfard  Bay,  and  terminates  in  a  vast  and  terrific  precipice.  From  hence  we  had  a 
very  grand  view  of  the  deep  crescent  of  the  bay,  girded  by  a  lofty,  rocky,  and  undulating 
coast :  Goodwich  was  directly  opposite  to  us,  and  though  the  softer  parts  of  its  scenery, 
the  trees  and  the  gardens,  were  not  distinguishable,  its  white  cottages  niched  in  the  cliff, 
with  the  sea  at  their  base  and  the  rocks  rising  above  them,  had  a  very  striking  effect. 

Returning  to  our  car  we  continued  our  journey,  still  without  meeting  any  thing  to 
disturb  us  out  of  our  road,  till  we  came  in  sight  of  Newport,  a  small  town  situated  in  a 
valley,  with  some  wood  scattered  about  it,  from  which  it  derives  an  air  of  warmth  and 
comfort  not  shared  in  many  parts  of  this  rude  and  desolate  country.  A  distant  view  of 
the  town  is  most  to  its  advantage;  for  on  entering  its  street,  the  first  and  irresistible  im- 
pression is  of  its  exceeding  filthiness.  We  observed  before  almost  every  door  in  the  place 
a  miscellaneous  accumulation  of  refuse,  in  a  formal  dunghill,  protected  by  a  stone  wall,  so 
that  the  provident  inhabitants  had  really  calculated  on  cherishing  these  reservoirs  of  rot- 
tenness. We  had  travelled  enough  not  to  be  surprised  at  seeing  people  sinking  into  dirt 
through  a  mere  indolent  acquiescence,  but  we  had  really  never  before  seen  it  made  so 
much  a  matter  of  sober  choice  and  design.  If  there  had  been  no  dirt  without  the  pale  of 
these  regular  sinks,  if  all  that  was  offensive  had  been  collected  before  each  door  in  a  focus 
of  filth,  a  passing  traveller  might  not  have  had  much  reason  to  complain;  but  the  street  of 
the  town  proved  in  its  whole  length  that  this  was  by  no  means  the  case.  Each  individual 
had  his  dunghill;  but  independent  of  these  little  plots  of  private  property,  there  was  a  great 
and  general  depot,  extending  from  one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other.  These  are  not  very 
elegant  topics  of  remark,  but  they  fall  naturally  within  the  scope  of  my  duty  as  a  traveller 
and  an  observer ;  if  I  had  omitted  these  facts,  I  must  have  passed  by  the  town  altogether 
without  notice,  for,  in  its  present  circumstances,  I  observed  no  other  subjects  for  comment. 

s  2  I  obtruded 


130  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    HRITAItf. 

I  obtruded  my  nose  into  the  interior  of  several  of  the  houses,  but  here  nothing  new  pre- 
sented itself;  and  were  I  to  proceed  to  details,  they  could  be  of  nothing  but  dirt. 

The  small  river  Nevern  flows  near  the  town,  and  a  quarter  of  a  mile  below  it  falls 
into  Newport  Bay.  It  is  not  navigable  for  any  kind  of  craft,  but  at  its  mouth  forms  a  small 
harbour,  though  so  exposed  that  it  is  seldom  resorted  to.  A  dangerous  bar  extends  com- 
pletely across  the  bay,  which  is  passable  only  at  high  water.  The  scenery  of  Newport  Bay 
is  less  grand  and  picturesque  than  that  of  Fishguard :  a  bold  headland,  called  Ceibwr, 
forms  its  eastern  point,  and  the  vast  Dinas  its  western  point;  but  the  interval  between 
these  boundaries  is  filled  up  by  a  flat  sand. 

At  the  period  of  the  Norman  conquests  and  dominion  in  Wales,  Newport  was  a 
station  of  importance,  and  the  capital  of  a  Lordship  Marcher,  a  title  given  to  certain  dis- 
tricts in  Wales  taken  by  right  of  force  and  plunder  from  their  lawful  proprietors.  Robert 
Pitzhamon  and  his  twelve  knights,  in  the  reign  of  William  the  Conqueror,  were  the  first 
who,  with  no  other  title  but  that  of  power,  carved  out  for  themselves  estates  in  South 
Wales ;  and  their  success  captivated  such  a  host  of  imitators,  that  in  the  course  of  a  century 
almost  every  county  in  Wales  included  a  Lordship  Marcher.  The  preliminaries  to  these 
acts  of  usurpation  were  settled  without  much  ceremony.  A  Norman  adventurer  peti- 
tioned the  king  of  England  that  he  might  keep  all  such  lands  in  Wales  as  he  could  win, 
and  the  king  seeing  that  he  should  lose  nothing  by  his  consent,  and  that  he  might  reward 
or  secure  a  favourite  by  it,  and  likewise  promote  his  own  designs  in  the  subjection  of 
Wales,  very  readily  accorded  it.  The  lessee  of  this  act  of  grace  had  then  a  clear  course 
before  him :  the  scruples  of  the  right  owners  or  the  suggestions  of  justice  and  honesty  were 
but  light  impediments;  and  if  he  had  but  strength  sufficient,  there  was  nothing  else  wanting 
to  confirm  him  a  Lord  Marcher.  It  was  necessary  to  the  consummation  ot  this  title  that 
he  should  acquire  his  territory  at  his  own  expense,  and  with  his  own  private  forces,  the 
king  giving  nothing  but  his  consent.  If  he  was  successful,  his  conquest  was  absolutely 
his  own,  and  he  reigned  over  it  with  the  authority  of  a  sovereign  prince. 

Possessions  obtained  on  such  principles  were  not  very  easily  maintained ;  and  the 
history  of  Wales  for  several  centuries  is  filled  with  acts  of  tyranny  and  oppression  on  the 
part  of  the  Normans,  and  violent,  but  ineffectual,  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  Welsh. 
The  latter  never  combined  with  all  the  power  and  resources  of  their  country  in  one  steady 
and  determined  resistance,  but  burst  out  into  occasional  ebullitions  of  resentment,  which 
expended  themselves  in  a  few  sudden  and  furious  blows,  but  had  no  effect  on  their 
enemies  than  that  of  putting  them  upon  their  guard,  and  provoking  them  to  a  more 
oppressive  exercise  of  their  authority.  The  chieftains  of  Wales  were  too  much  engaged 
in  adjusting  their  own  personal  disputes,  and  in  reconciling  the  discordant  interests  of 
their  own  ill-constructed  government,  to  give  their  attention  with  proper  constancy  and 
combination  to  their  foreign  invaders,  who  owed  to  this  diversion  in  their  favour,  at  least 

as 


VOYAGE    HOUND   GREAT     BRITAIN.  131 

as  much  as  to  their  own  energy  and  skill,  their  permanent  establishment  in  the  country. 
I  know  not  that  the  general  sum  of  misery  in  Wales  was  much  increased  by  the  invasion 
of  the  Normans;  for  the  inhabitants,  from  the  earliest  period  of  their  known  history,  were 
always  fighting  amongst  themselves  from  one  end  of  the  kingdom  to  the  other,  and  on  the 
arrival  of  their  foreign  enemies,  their  disputes  were  not  multiplied,  but  divided,  and  they 
had  occasionally  an  opportunity  of  indulging  their  rooted  disposition  to  arms,  without  the 
sin  and  shame  of  shedding  each  others  blood.  But  little  as  they  had  that  was  worth  con- 
tending for  in  the  frame  of  their  constitution,  the  love  of  liberty  was  certainly  never  more 
signally  displayed  by  any  people  than  by  the  Welsh;  and  though  their  exertions  were  too 
ill  combined  and  directed  to  make  any  serious  impression  on  their  enemies,  jret  in  spite  of 
failure  after  failure,  they  renewed  them  with  a  spirit  and  activity  that  were  unconquerable. 
The  principle  one  cannot  but  admire,  though  instant  submission  had  been  better  than  this 
protracted  and  unavailing  resistance,  by  which  they  had  no  prospect  of  effecting  their 
deliverance,  and  which  contributed  only  to  support  their  liberty  through  the  struggles  of  a 
lingering  death. 

The  conqueror  of  Cemaes,  a  district  of  great  extent,  and  of  which  Newport  formed 
a  part,  was  Martin  de  Tours,  who  exerted  the  same  tyranny  and  experienced  the  same 
opposition  as  his  cotemporary  usurpers,  and  like  them  still  preserved  his  ascendancy.  He 
transmitted  his  power  and  possessions  to  his  son  Nicholas,  who  maintained  them  with 
equal  success,  and  delivered  them  down  to  his  son  William.  This  knight  married  a 
daughter  of  the  Lord  Rhys,  and  by  this  family  compact  at  once  compromised  all  dif- 
ferences :  the  people  submitted  and  owned  the  authority  of  their  new  masters,  of  course 
reserving  to  themselves  that  right  of  occasional  plunder  which  they  impartially  extended 
to  their  own  countrymen.  The  Lord  Rhys,  whom  Welsh  historians  combine  to  call  the 
only  safeguard  and  the  truest  friend  of  his  country,  does  not  appear  to  be  exactly  justifia- 
ble on  strict  principles  of  patriotism,  in  thus  sacrificing  the  liberties  of  his  people  to  con- 
siderations of  family  aggrandizement;  but  one  is  willing  to  admit  any  thing  that  bears  the 
shadow  of  an  apology  for  the  actions  of  a  high  and  distinguished  character,  and  may 
therefore  believe  that  in  this  instance  the  prince  gave  up  his  pride  to  policy,  and  conci- 
liated a  part  of  his  enemies  by  concession,  that  he  might  employ  his  power  with  more 
weight  against  the  remainder. 

Newport  was  the  principal  seat  of  residence  of  the  Lords  Marchers  of  Cemaes,  and 
still  bears  some  traces  of  this  distinction  in  the  fragments  of  a  castle,  which  stand  on  the 
summit  of  a  high  and  steep  knoll  at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  town.  They  are  too 
much  disfigured  for  any  one,  not  well  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  architecture  in 
Norman  castles,  to  make  out  any  thing  like  regular  forms  and  proportions,  but  they  still 
retain  something  of  majesty  about  them,  which  is  well  set  off  by  their  situation.  They 
command  the  whole  length  of  the  town  or  street,  not  indeed  a  very  imposing  perspective, 
but  terminated  at  the  other  extremity  by  the  sea ;  and  a  dark,  rugged,  and  stony  moun- 
tain, 


132  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

tain,  called  Carn  Englyn,  rises  abruptly  to  the  south,  and  forms  a  very  magnificent  back 
ground.  In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  Newport  is  reported  to  have  been  in 
a  very  thriving  condition,  and  to  have  carried  on  an  extensive  trade  in  woollen  manufac- 
tures, but  its  prosperity  was  suddenly  interrupted  by  a  dreadful  mortality,  which  burst  out 
in  the  town  and  reduced  it  to  a  desert.  The  people  who  escaped  the  disease  quitted 
their  habitations  and  fled  to  Fishguard,  which,  in  consequence  of  its  more  elevated  and  air\- 
situation,  remained  untainted.  Newport  never  recovered  from  the  effects  of  this  calamity; 
but  if  dirt  is  a  source  of  pestilence,  it  flourishes  in  its  present  state  of  obscurity  most 
miraculously. 

As  the  carriage  road  from  Newport  to  Cardigan  lies  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the 
sea,  we  made  an  excursion  on  foot,  that  we  might  obtain  a  view  of  the  coast,  but  were  not 
very  amply  repaid  for  our  trouble.  On  a  peninsula,  bounded  on  the  west  side  by  Newport 
Bay,  and  on  the  east  by  Aberkibor  Bay,  a  well  chosen  situation  for  those  who  lived  in  a 
land  of  enemies,  many  of  the  Norman  leaders  who  had  assisted  Martin  de  Tours  in  his 
conquest  of  Cemaes  fixed  their  places  of  residence.  This  circumstance  was  not  known  to 
us  when  we  were  on  the  spot,  which  retained  nothing  externally  to  provoke  our  enquiries ; 
many  of  the  names  of  these  ancient  mansions  have  survived,  but  their  places  are  now 
filled  by  ordinary  farm-houses,  whose  inhabitants  were  probably  as  ignorant  as  ourselves 
that  they  and  their  cows  and  pigs  were  fattening  on  the  same  ground  where  once  dwelt 
the  warlike  followers  of  Martin  de  Tours.  From  the  extreme  point  of  the  peninsula  we 
had  a  view  of  the  coast  to  the  eastward,  in  long  perspective,  as  far  as  Cemaes  Head,  a 
huge  promontory,  far  advanced  and  towering  above  every  other  eminence.  A  line  of 
naked  cliffs  is  extended  between  this  headland  and  the  spot  where  we  stood,  but  not  equal 
in  ruggedness  and  grandeur  to  many  parts  of  the  coast  of  Pembrokeshire  which  we  had 
already  seen.  There  is  no  other  town  to  the  eastward  of  Newport  on  this  coast,  nor  any 
other  object  to  recompense  attention  :  we  therefore  declined  pursuing  a  circuitous  and  un- 
interesting track  along  shore  to  Cardigan,  and,  returning  to  Newport,  continued  our  journey 
by  the  shortest  road.  As  we  advanced  the  country  occasionally  assumed  an  appearance 
of  more  cheerfulness  and  cultivation  than  we  had  observed  of  late,  and  a  tree  became  an 
object  of  less  surprise  to  us ;  but  there  was  little  of  picturesque  beauty,  and  indeed  nothing 
that  any  one  would  have  paused  to  remark  whose  eyes  had  not  been,  like  ours,  accustomed 
for  some  time  to  scenes  which  wanted  the  most  ordinary  recommendations  of  nature.  Our 
road  lay  over  some  very  long  and  steep  hills,  but  was  not  quite  so  rugged  as  that  which 
we  had  lately  passed,  and  we  were  permitted  to  arrive  at  Cardigan,  and  fulfil  a  journey  of 
at  least  sixty  miles,  on  one  pair  of  wheels,  certainly  not  the  least  memorable  circumstance 
of  our  achievements  during  the  last  five  or  six  days. 

Cardigan  stands  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Teivi,  which  here  divides  the  counties  of 
Cardiganshire  and  Pembrokeshire.  There  is  a  handsome  bridge  over  it,  which  forms  an 
imposing  entrance  into  the  town,  and  which  on  our  approach  raised  expectations  in  its 

favour 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GKKAT    BRITAIN.  133 

favour  that  a  nearer  acquaintance  at  once  overruled.  Though  the  county  town,  and  pro- 
bably justifying  this  rank  by  a  due  degree  of  superiority  over  every  other  town  in  the 
county,  yet  it  offers  very  little  for  comment.  The  main  street  contains  a  few  decent 
houses,  is  well  paved,  and  has  altogether  a  creditable  appearance :  but  these  simple  re- 
commendations do  not  extend  to  any  other  part  of  the  town.  Although  I  have  felt  every 
disposition  to  judge  with  candour,  my  remarks  on  Welsh  towns  have  hitherto  not  been 
very  flattering ;  and  it  may  be  imagined  that  I  am  ridiculously  fastidious,  and  that  I  have 
left  the  metropolis  with  some  of  its  best  streets  fresh  in  my  recollection,  which  I  make  my 
standards  of  comparison  throughout  my  travels.  But  I  am  not  quite  so  unconscionable; 
and  though,  like  all  other  travellers,  I  may  be  occasionally  liable  to  little  obliquities  of  judg- 
ment which  are  not  to  be  controlled,  yet  the  circumstances  which  produce  them  will  as 
often  incline  me  to  a  too  favourable  as  to  a  too  unmerciful  decision.  It  is  necessary  to  have 
some  fixed  criterion  in  the  mind  in  order  to  preserve  one's  ideas  of  excellence  from  confu- 
sion, or  absolute  perversion ;  but  it  is  difficult  in  a  long  chain  of  comparison  to  keep  this 
criterion  firm  in  its  just  proportions,  and  good  and  bad  will  appear  with  an  undue  degree 
of  advantage  or  disadvantage,  according  to  the  succession  in  which  they  are  seen.  In 
other  words,  I  had  not  forgotten  Portland  Place  when  I  entered  Cardigan;  but  Fishguard 
and  Newport  were  more  immediately  and  freshly  in  my  recollection,  and  had,  no  doubt, 
some  effect  on  my  opinion. 

The  best  building  in  the  place  is  the  gaol,  which  stands  at  the  northern  extremity  of 
the  town,  and  gives  an  air  of  some  consequence  to  the  entrance  in  this  direction.  It  was 
built  after  the  design  of  Mr.  Nash,  and  seems  in  all  its  departments  to  be  well  contrived 
for  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  prisoners. 

Cardigan  is  a  town  of  great  antiquity,  or  rather  occupies  the  place  of  a  town  of 
antiquity,  and  being  in  the  ancient  divisions  of  Wales  a  frontier  town,  it  was  of  the  highest 
importance  as  a  military  post,  and  was  very  often  distinguished  as  the  scene  of  action  both 
in  the  contests  between  the  rival  princes  of  the  country,  and  in  their  struggles  with  their 
foreign  enemies.  There  are  still  some  remains  of  its  castle,  but  they  are  very  trifling,  and 
serve  only  to  identify  the  ground  on  which  it  stood.  No  mention  is  made  of  a  fortress  on 
this  spot  in  the  Welsh  Chronicle  till  the  year  1155,  when  the  Lord  Rhys,  apprehending  an 
attack  from  Owen  Gwynedd,  Prince  of  North  Wales,  is  said  to  have  built  a  castle  at 
Aberteivi,  the  British  name  of  Cardigan,  for  the  defence  of  his  frontier.  It  is  probable, 
however,  that  the  Normans.,  who  had  made  incursions  in  this  part  of  the  country  long  before 
this  period,  were  the  first  who  erected  a  castle  here,  and  that  it  was  merely  repaired  or  gar- 
risoned by  the  Lord  Rhys.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Welsh  at  this  time  had 
the  art  of  building  castles ;  if  they  had,  they  would  certainly  have  employed  it  more  ge- 
nerally, and  not  have  allowed  the  whole  line  of  their  coast  to  be  usurped  by  the  fortresses 
of  their  enemies.  This,  indeed,  is  reasoning  against  the  positive  affirmation  of  the  Welsh 
historian;  but '  levelled  with  the  ground/  and  '  built/  are  forms  of  expression  in  the  history  of 

castles, 


134  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN". 

castles,  so  indiscriminately  employed  in  describing  all  degrees  of  damage  and  renovation, 
that  they  are  not  to  be  construed  in  their  strictest  signification,  in  contradiction  to  common 
reason  and  probability. 

In  the  year  1158,  Roger  de  Clare,  a  Norman  chief,  having,  through  the  liberality  of 
Henry  the  Second,  gained  permission  to  plunder  in  Wales,  invaded  Cardigan  with  an  army, 
and  among  other  acquisitions  secured  Aberteivi,  and  fortified  the  castle.  The  Prince 
Rhys  represented  the  injustice  of  these  aggressions  to  the  king,  but  not  being  able  to  gain 
any  other  redress  than  smooth  words  and  courtly  smiles,  and  not  considering  these  as  a 
sufficient  indemnification  for  the  loss  of  his  lands,  he  resolved  to  fix  his  own  measure  of 
retaliation,  and  entering  Cardigan,  destroyed  the  castle,  which  had  lately  been  taken  or 
erected  by  his  enemy.  He  could  not,  however,  destroy  its  principle  of  reproduction, 
which  indeed  was  rendered  more  active  by  the  very  means  employed  to  repress  it.  The 
eras  of  its  restoration  are  not  so  regularly  marked  as  those  of  its  downfal,  but  they  pro- 
bably followed  each  other  in  certain  and  rapid  succession ;  for  whenever  or  by  whom- 
soever it  is  destroyed,  on  the  breaking  out  of  any  new  dispute,  we  always  find  it  in  its  place, 
and  ready  to  be  knocked  down  again. 

In  the  year  1165,  King  Henry,  being  bitterly  incensed  at  the  presumption  of  the 
Lord  Rhys  in  daring  to  covet  what  it  had  pleased  his  Majesty  to  take  away,  prepared  to 
chastise  him ;  and  having  received  an  outrage  of  a  similar  description  from  David,  the 
son  of  Owen  Gwyneth,  Prince  of  North  Wales,  he  determined  to  punish  both  offenders  by 
one  blow,  and  for  this  purpose  collected  all  the  forces  of  his  kingdom  and  invaded  Wales, 
"  minding  utterly  to  destroy  all  that  had  life  in  the  land."  The  princes  of  North  and 
South  Wales  and  the  Prince  of  Powys,  with  a  spirit  of  cordial  cooperation  that  is  almost 
unprecedented  in  the  history  of  their  country,  combined  to  oppose  him:  the  king,  fearful 
of  a  surprise,  encamped  in  the  open  plains;  but  the  Welsh,  too  prudent  to  encounter  him 
here  in  a  pitched  battle,  kept  their  forces  among  the  straits  of  the  mountains,  and  em- 
ployed all  their  attention  and  resources  in  cutting  off  his  supplies  of  provisions,  in  which 
they  succeeded  so  effectually,  that,  not  daring  to  attack  them  in  their  defiles,  he  was  at 
length  compelled  to  retire,  with  no  other  glory,  after  all  his  threats  of  extermination,  but 
that  of  having  just  saved  his  army  from  absolute  famine.  In  the  passage  of  a  bridge, 
during  his  retreat,  the  king  is  said  to  have  been  in  a  situation  of  imminent  danger:  a 
Welshman  who  was  near  him,  and  recognized  his  person,  aimed  an  arrow  at  him,  which 
would  certainly  have  pierced  his  body,  had  not  one  of  his  attendants,  seeing  its  approach 
thrown  himself  before  him,  and  thus  preserved  the  life  of  his  master  by  the  sacrifice  of  his 
own. 

Henry  made  another  attempt  against  Wales,  but  with  equal  ill  success  ;  and  on  his  final 
retreat,  the  Lord  Rhys  advanced  against  Aberteivi  and  stormed  the  castle,  "  and  laid  it  flat 
with  the  ground."  An  act  of  such  utter  demolition  would  have  been  very  imprudent ;  for 
the  object  of  Rhys  in  attacking  the  castle  was  not  only  to  take  it  from  his  enemies,  but  to 

secure 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  135 

secure  it  for  himself;  and  it  is  most  likely  that  on  this  occasion  it  suffered  only  the  com- 
mon injuries  of  a  siege,  which  with  the  means  of  offence  then  in  use  could  not  have  been 
equal  to  this  total  prostration. 

After  this  event  the  castle  was  permitted  for  a  considerable  time  to  stand  at  ease : 
the  Lord  Rhys  and  King  Henry  became  reconciled,  and  many  acts  of  kindness  and 
courtesy  were  exchanged  between  them.  During  this  interval  of  quiet,  Aberteivi  was 
distinguished  by  a  scene  of  a  more  cheering  description  than  was  often  permitted  to  inter- 
rupt the  dismal  monotony  of  those  days  of  battery  and  blood.  In  the  year  1177  the 
prince  gave  a  splendid  feast  in  the  castle,  which  had  been  proclaimed  through  all  Britain, 
and  at  which  numerous  strangers  attended,  who  were  all  very  honourably  received  and 
liberally  entertained.  Among  deeds  of  arms  and  other  shows,  gratifications  of  a  higher 
character  were  prepared  for  their  amusement :  the  prince  caused  all  the  bards  of  Wales  to 
be  invited,  "  and  provided  chairs  for  them  to  be  set  in  his  hall,  where  they  should  dispute 
together,  and  try  their  cunning  and  gift  in  their  faculties,  and  where  great  rewards  and 
rich  gifts  were  appointed  for  the  overcomers ;  amongst  Avhom  they  of  North  Wales  wan 
the  price,  and  among  the  musicians  Rhys's  own  household  men  were  counted  the  best." 

Really  when  we  advert  to  the  habits  and  manners  of  society  at  the  time,  these  feasts 
of  the  ancient  princes  of  Wales  seem  to  have  been  conceived  in  almost  as  good  a  taste, 
and  to  have  indicated  almost  as  just  a  notion  of  rational  and  manly  entertainment,  as  the 
carnivals  of  our  modern  princes.  The  economy  of  the  table  was  not  thought  of  sufficient 
importance  to  be  recorded,  and  it  was  probably  covered  in  a  plain  and  plentiful  style, 
and  supported  nothing  in  the  form  of  flesh  or  fish  that  was  intended  for  any  more  recon- 
dite purpose  than  that  of  being  eaten ;  but  the  want  of  this  kind  of  elegance  and  embroi- 
dery was  not  felt  in  those  coarse  times;  for  it  is  particularly  mentioned,  that  the  guests  all 
retired  from  the  feast  perfectly  satisfied  with  their  host  and  his  exertions  for  their  amusement. 
This  general  disposition  to  be  pleased  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  the  temper  of  the  present 
times,  as  illustrated  on  a  recent  occasion,  when,  though  the  most  extraordinary  pains  were 
taken  to  please  us,  and  though  all  the  diversions  which  were  prepared  for  us  were  calculated 
to  awaken  the  tenderest  associations,  by  recalling  to  us  our  earliest  toys  and  the  sweets  of 
our  swaddling-clothes,  yet  we  repaid  them  all  with  nothing  but  pouting  and  sulking. 

The  Lord  Rhys,  during  the  latter  period  of  his  life,  was  on  amicable  terms  with 
England,  and  we  hear  no  further  mention  of  his  name  in  connexion  with  Aberteivi,  though 
the  dissensions  of  his  sons,  a  wild  and  ungovernable  race,  and  the  aggressions  of  chieftains 
of  his  own  country,  continued  to  give  full  employment  to  his  activity  and  his  military 
taste  and  talent.  After  his  death,  in  1196,  his  son  Gruffydd  succeeded  to  his  possessions, 
and  enjoyed  them  in  peace,  till  his  brother  Maelgwn,  who  had  been  disinherited,  raised 
an  army,  in  league  with  Gwenwynwyn,  son  of  the  Prince  of  Powys,  and  coming  upon  him 
suddenly  at  Aberystwith,  took  him  prisoner,  and  won  all  his  lands  in  Cardigan.  He  was 
delivered  up  by  Gwenwynwyn  into  the  hands  of  the  English,  and  Maelgwn  then  quietly  took 

T  possession 


136  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIW. 

possession  of  his  castle  at  Aberteivi.  In  the  year  1198>  the  English  being  exasperated 
against  Gwenwynwyn  for  having  attacked  one  of  the  Norman  settlers,  raised  a  force 
against  him,  and  preparatory  to  action,  released  Gruffyth,  who  they  knew  would  act  as 
their  friend,  because  he  was  Gwenwynwyn's  enemy,  and  who  accordingly  collected  all 
his  power  and  joined  it  with  theirs.  The  allied  force  was  met  by  Gwenwynwyn  with 
great  bravery ;  but  after  a  vigorous  resistance  he  was  utterly  routed,  with  the  loss  of  3700 
men.  Gruffyth  followed  up  his  successes,  and  soon  recovered  all  his  estates,  except  two 
castles,  of  which  Aberteivi  was  one.  Maelgwn  now,  dreading  the  anger  and  strength  of 
his  brother,  took  a  solemn  oath,  that  if  he  would  give  him  pledges  for  the  security  of  his 
person,  he  would  deliver  up  the  castle  to  him  on  a  certain  day :  Gruffyth  consented  to 
this  arrangement;  but  Maelgwn,  as  soon  as  he  had  got  the  pledges  into  his  power,  sent 
them  to  prison,  and  fortified  the  castle  for  his  own  use.  He  kept  it  for  some  time,  when 
rinding  that  he  could  by  no  means  maintain  it  longer  to  his  own  advantage,  he  resolved 
that  it  should  at  least  contribute  nothing  to  that  of  his  brother,  and  therefore  gave  it  up  to 
the  English,  it  being,  as  the  Welsh  historian  declares,  the  key  and  lock  of  all  Wales.  It 
remained  in  the  power  of  the  English  till  it  was  recovered  in  the  year  1215,  by  Lhewelyn 
ap  Jorwerth,  Prince  of  North  Wales,  a  man  of  great  courage,  talent,  and  activity,  whose 
reign  was  distinguished  by  a  long  series  of  victories.  On  the  capture  of  Aberteivi,  he 
divided  the  estates  of  South  Wales  among  the  descendants  of  the  Lord  Rhys.  This  castle 
fell  to  the  lot  of  Owen,  the  son  of  Gruffyth ;  but  he  did  not  long  enjoy  it ;  for  the  Flemings 
having  surprised  and  taken  possession  of  it,  Lhewelyn  again  advanced  against  it  in  1220, 
and  destroyed  it  and  put  the  whole  garrison  to  the  sword.  It  sprung  up  again,  however, 
and  in  1223  was  taken  by  William  Marshall,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  who  retained  it  till 
his  death,  in  1231.  In  this  year  the  town  of  Aberteivi  was  destroyed,  and  all  the  inha- 
bitants slaughtered,  by  Maelgwn,  the  son  of  Maelgwn  ap  Rhys :  the  castle  withstood 
this  terrible  shock,  but  the  conqueror  soon  returned  with  more  ample  forces,  and  levelled 
it  with  the  ground,  and  also  broke  down  the  bridge  over  the  river.  Enough  of  ruin  was 
combined  in  these  two  blows,  to  satisfy  all  parties  for  some  time,  and  we  hear  nothing 
more  of  Aberteivi  till  in  the  year  1240,  when  it  is  said  to  have  been  taken  and  fortified  by 
Gilbert  Marshall.  This  is  the  last  notice  of  it  that  occurs  in  the  Welsh  Chronicle,  and  it 
is  probable,  that  from  this  period  it  remained  without  further  interruption  in  the  hands  of 
the  English. 

There  are  no  manufactures  at  Cardigan,  nor  is  it  much  enlivened  by  the  bustle  of  any 
kind  of  trade.  The  Teivi  is  navigable  for  vessels  of  small  burden  up  to  the  bridge ;  but  a 
bar  at  its  mouth  prevents  the  entrance  of  large  ships,  and  denies  to  the  town  any  very  im- 
portant or  extensive  commerce.  The  river  abounds  with  salmon,  which  is  said  to  be  of  a 
finer  quality  than  that  of  any  other  river  in  Wales.  It  has  long  been  thus  noted  ;  but  its 
claims  to  superiority  rest  on  some  niceties  of  distinction  which  I  was  not  able  to  discri- 
minate, though  I  very  cheerfully  and  readily  admitted,  that  it  at  least  rivalled  the  best 

salmon 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  137 

salmon  that  ever  came  under  the  cognizance  of  my  palate ;  and  this  was  a  degree  of  perfec- 
tion quite  sufficient  for  me,  who  had  not  been  led  from  London  to  Cardigan  on  purpose 
to  try  the  question.  The  fish  are  caught  as  high  up  as  Llanbeder,  more  than  thirty  miles 
up  the  river,  and  furnish  employment  and  subsistence  for  a  great  number  of  people.  We 
were  present  at  the  catching  of  some  close  to  the  bridge  at  Cardigan,  and  our  interest  in 
the  sport  was  principally  engaged  by  the  coracles,  boats  of  a  very  primitive  kind  of  con- 
struction, which  are  said  to  be  in  common  use  in  most  of  the  rivers  in  Wales,  though  we 
had  no  opportunity  of  seeing  them  at  any  other  place  but  this.  They  are  made  of  laths 
and  split  twigs,  and  covered  round  with  hides  or  pitched  canvass,  being  precisely  of  the 
same  materials  and  workmanship  as  the  boats  which  are  said  by  ancient  historians  to  have 
been  used  by  the  Britons,  at  the  period  of  their  trade  with  the  Phenicians.  It  is  curious 
to  see  an  invention  thus  delivered  down  unaltered  through  so  long  a  series  of  ages,  and 
particularly  as  it  is  not  remarkable  for  any  extraordinary  nicety  of  adaptation  to  the  pur- 
poses for  which  it  is  used.  The  chief  recommendation  of  these  boats  is  the  facility  and 
cheapness  with  which  they  are  made:  almost  every  peasant  can  command  ingenuity  or 
money  enough  to  make  or  buy  a  coracle,  though  few  have  enough  of  either  to  become 
masters  of  a  more  elaborate  and  substantial  boat.  They  are  used  only  by  the  peasants,  or 
by  those  who  can  occasionally  steal  an  hour  OE  two  from  other  avocations  to  devote  to 
fishing,  but  who  being  only  desultory  adventurers,  cannot  afford  to  supply  themselves  with 
the  regular  equipment  of  the  trade.  The  established  fishermen  do  not  make  use  of  these 
fragile  vessels,  which  indeed  would  be  perfectly  incompetent  to  withstand  the  violent  shocks 
of  wind  and  weather  to  which  they  are  sometimes  exposed.  Those  which  we  saw  were  not 
more  than  five  feet  long  and  four  feet  broad,  and  were  so  insecure  that  the  utmost  cau- 
tion was  necessary,  even  in  water  as  smooth  as  glass,  to  prevent  their  turning  over,  an 
accident  which,  in  the  ardour  and  agitation  of  securing  a  fish,  not  unfrequently  happens. 
I  ventured  to  trust  myself  in  one  of  them  for  a  moment,  but  found  it  so  exceedingly  mer- 
curial in  its  motions,  that  I  could  as  soon  have  preserved  my  centre  on  the  slack  wire. 
They  are  so  light,  that  a  man,  when  his  sport  is  at  an  end,  regularly  puts  his  coracle  over 
his  head,  and  marches  off  with  as  much  ease  as  if  it  was  his  hat. 

The  Teivi  is  celebrated  for  its  richness  in  the  picturesque,  and  combines  perhaps  on 
its  banks  a  greater  extent  of  bold  and  beautiful  scenery  than  is  to  be  found  in  any  other 
parts  of  the  counties  which  it  divides.  Rock  and  wood  are  the  principal  materials  in  the 
catalogue  of  its  embellishments,  but  these  are  so  diversified  in  their  forms,  and  their  effects 
are  so  multiplied  by  their  modes  of  combination  and  contrast,  and  the  ever-changing 
points  of  view  in  which  they  are  exhibited  by  the  windings  of  the  river,  that  the  whole 
seems  to  be  distinguished  by  no  charm  so  prominent  as  its  unbounded  variety.  It  is 
between  Cardigan  and  Kilgerran  Castle  that  this  luxuriant  display  is  to  be  seen,  but  there 
are  views  below  the  town  scarcely  inferior  in  beauty,  though  of  a  different  character. 
About  half  a  mile  below  the  bridge,  on  the  Pembrokeshire  side  of  the  river,  is  the  village 

T2  of 


138  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  St.  Dogmaels;  and  if  happiness  were  altogether  an  affair  of  place,  I  know  not  where  life 
could  be  passed  with  fewer  wishes  ungratified.  I  can  give  but  a  very  inadequate  repre- 
sentation of  it  by  description.  I  may  detail  its  parts,  but  all  those  circumstances  of 
grouping  and  contrasting,  by  which  the  parts  are  made  individually  of  importance,  as 
they  harmonize  together  and  contribute  to  fill  up  the  broad  canvass  in  one  extended  and 
accordant  view,  are  beyond  the  power  of  language,  or  certainly  of  language  of  mine. 
The  cottages  are  embowered  in  wood,  and  immediately  behind  them  rises  a  back  ground 
of  majestic  hills,  bold  and  irregular  in  their  forms,  but  all  tempered  by  cultivation,  and  up 
to  their  summits  waving  with  corn  or  spread  out  in  luxuriant  pastures.  The  noiseless  river 
gliding  at  their  base,  clear  and  silvery,  and  from  the  rocks  and  wood  on  its  banks  possess- 
ing all  the  superadded  enchantment  that  can  be  given  by  every  variety  of  light  and 
shadow,  fills  up  the  view.  As  you  approach  nearer  to  the  sea,  the  scenery  becomes  less 
striking,  but  still  the  river  contributes  to  make  it  beautiful ;  as  it  meets  the  broad  flat 
sand,  it  diffuses  itself  in  streaks  all  over  it,  and  winds  its  way  in  many  channels  and  many 
forms  to  the  wide  sea,  which  roaring  and  bursting  in  foam  receives  it,  and  at  once  closes 
all  the  softness  and  sweetness  of  the  scene.  This  is  its  effect  at  low  water ;  when  the  tide 
is  in,  it  loses  itself  in  the  sea  by  a  less  perceptible  transition.  We  amused  ourselves  on 
the  sands  till  they  were  nearly  covered,  and  returned  in  company  with  a  large  fleet  of 
fishing  boats,  bound  to  St.  Dogmaels,  which  had  had  a  very  successful  night's  cruise 
among  the  herrings.  They  and  their  boats  and  cargoes  gave  to  the  village  additional 
circumstances  of  interest  in  a  picturesque  point  of  view,  and  altogether  composed  a  very 
lively  scene :  the  cottages  all  poured  forth  their  inhabitants,  who  flocked  to  the  water's 
side ;  and  when  they  beheld  the  rich  spoils,  every  face  beamed  with  joy,  and  every  heart 
was  full,  as  was  no  doubt  in  a  very  short  time  every  frying-pan  in  the  village. 

There  is  some  food  for  the  antiquary  at  St.  Dogmaels  in  the  remains  of  a  priory,  but 
they  are  not  in  a  state  to  contribute  much  either  of  delight  or  nourishment  to  his 
curiosity.  The  ruins  are  extensive,  though  they  are  not  easily  distinguishable  as  ruins, 
being  attached  to  some  upstart  walls  of  the  present  century,  with  which  they  combine  to 
form  barns,  cowhouses,  and  other  still  viler  tenements.  Their  monastic  character  has 
been  even  more  obscured  by  these  prophane  additions  than  their  appearances  of  anti- 
quity ;  but  a  few  traces  of  sculptural  decoration  still  survive,  which  serve  at  once  as  signs 
of  their  present  humiliation  and  memorials  of  their  former  consequence.  Martin  de 
Tours  is  said  to  have  been  the  founder  of  this  monastery,  which  was  for  monks  of  the 
order  of  St.  Benedict,  and  annexed  as  a  cell  to  the  abbey  of  Tyrone  in  France.  His  son 
Robert  conferred  on  it  considerable  possessions  and  many  valuable  privileges,  amongst 
which  were  the  fishery  of  St.  Dogmaels,  pasture  for  their  herds  of  swine  in  his  woods,  and 
the  skins  of  all  the  deer  caught  in  his  parks,  except  those  which  were  the  customary  per- 
quisites of  his  huntsmen*. 

*  Dugdale. 

It 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  139 

It  has  often  been  remarked,  that  these  monks,  I  mean  all  monks,  were  very  happy 
in  their  choice  of  situations,  and  that  if  there  was  an  acre  of  land  more  particularly  dis- 
tinguished for  its  fruitfulness  than  another,  they  never  overlooked  it.  St.  Dogmaels  may 
certainly  be  adduced  in  illustration  of  this  remark.  Their  judgment,  however,  may  not 
have  been  signalized  in  the  first  selection,  which  was  not  always  under  their  own  control; 
but  as  they  were  men  of  more  knowledge  than  other  people,  they  may  have  employed 
more  efficient  modes  of  agriculture,  and  if  they  did  not  find  their  estates  better  than 
those  around  them,  they  may  have  contrived  to  make  them  so. 

A  fair  wind  and  fine  weather,  which,  according  to  the  construction  of  a  seaman,  are 
almost  synonymous,  tempted  us  to  pursue  our  voyage  from  Cardigan  in  a  boat.  We  set 
sail  at  the  bridge,  and  soon  reached  the  open  sea,  which  lies  at  the  distance  of  about  three 
miles  below  the  town.  All  richness  of  vegetation  ceases  as  you  approach  the  salt  water, 
and  the  land  exchanges  its  gay  colours  and  gentle  features  for  forms  of  rudeness  and  gran- 
deur. The  coasts  on  each  side  of  the  river's  mouth  are  uncommonly  majestic,  particu- 
larly on  the  Pembrokeshire  side,  where  Cemaes  Head  forms  the  boundary,  a  promontory 
of  immense  height,  with  two  fronts  of  bare  and  perpendicular  rock.  At  high  tide  the  sea 
spreads  over  the  whole  sand  from  shore  to  shore,  and  makes  a  noble  avenue  to  the  river, 
at  least  so  it  appeared  to  the  eye ;  but  our  boatmen,  who  judged  from  the  profounder 
authority  of  the  lead  and  the  line,  declared  that  it  was  nothing  but  a  chequer-work  of 
banks  and  shoals,  and  one  of  the  most  dangerous  havens  in  Wales. 

Opposite  to  Cemaes  Head,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  estuary,  is  a  small  island, 
called  Cardigan  Island,  detached  from  the  mainland  by  a  very  narrow  strait  obstructed 
by  masses  of  rock,  but  passable  for  small  boats.  It  is  about  half  a  mile  in  circumference, 
and  produces  excellent  food  for  sheep,  but  affords  very  little  matter  for  the  common- 
place book  of  a  tourist.  When  we  had  passed  through  the  narrow  strait  which  separates 
it  from  the  mainland,  we  had  a  long  extent  of  coast  stretched  out  before  us,  of  a  cha- 
racter more  vast  than  any  we  had  seen  since  we  left  the  north  coast  of  Devon.  The  cliffs 
are  not  so  rugged  as  those  of  Pembrokeshire,  being  generally  covered  with  earth,  and 
embellished  with  a  little  grass,  which  the  sea-wind  permits  to  grow,  though  not  exactly 
to  grow  green.  This  clothing,  scanty  and  rusty  as  it  is,  softens  in  some  degree  the 
savageness  of  the  precipices,  and  we  looked  up  to  their  summits  without  experiencing  that 
crawling  of  the  blood  which  we  had  been  so  much  subject  to  among  the  naked  crags  of 
Pembrokeshire.  But  if  there  is  less  of  the  terrible  in  these  cliffs,  and  if  their  forms  are  less 
minutely  divided,  and  they  present  a  less  multifarious  and  perplexing  detail  of  caverns  and 
projections,  there  is  a  simple  majesty  in  their  huge  masses  which  at  once  fills  and  satisfies  the 
eye ;  and  the  general  line  of  the  coast  is  sufficiently  broken  along  its  front  and  its  summit, 
by  hollows,  and  ridges,  and  peaks,  to  relieve  the  appearance  of  heaviness  and  uniformity. 
At  intervals,  too,  their  thin  vestment  of  earth  and  vegetation  is  cast  aside,  and  the  cliffs 
stand  exposed  in  all  their  nakedness  and  deformity,  and  present  their  precipices  to  the 

eye 


140  VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

eye  and  the  imagination,  not  more  terrible  in  their  depth,  than  in  the  black  and  jagged 
rocks  which  roughen  their  sides.  The  extended  line  which  we  commanded  in  one  view 
formed  a  striking  distinction  between  the  coast  of  Cardiganshire  and  the  adjoining  coast 
of  Pembrokeshire :  the  latter  is  so  deeply  indented,  and  its  promontories  are  so  frequent 
and  of  such  vast  projection,  that  our  views  along  its  front  were  always  bounded  by  a 
bold  and  distinct  horizon ;  but  the  coast  of  Cardiganshire  is  drawn  out  in  one  long  range 
of  stupendous  cliffs,  broken  by  gentle  bays  and  promontories,  so  as  to  vary  without  in- 
terrupting the  perspective,  which  the  eye  follows  in  all  its  turnings  and  inflections,  till  it 
gradually  fades  into  obscurity. 

The  great  compass  of  our  prospect  was  its  leading  distinction,  and  it  afforded  few 
objects  of  sufficient  prominence  and  singularity  for  specific  observation.  Our  boatmen 
had  but  little  exercise  in  their  office  as  expositors,  the  general  regularity  of  the  coast  con- 
fining its  list  of  seamarks  within  a  very  limited  vocabulary,  and  precluding  the  necessity 
of  any  brisk  reciprocation  of  questions  and  answers  between  us.  This  indolence  of 
tongues,  however,  extended  only  to  the  scenery  around  us,  and  there  was  no  want  of 
conversation  in  the  boat:  but  its  topics  would  form  too  violent  a  digression  from  the  legiti- 
mate purposes  of  our  travels  to  be  publicly  exposed,  and  it  must  therefore  perish  with  our- 
selves. I  may  perhaps  just  intimate,  that  our  principal  theme  was  politics,  that  they 
were  very  warmly  discussed,  and  that  our  helmsman,  in  particular,  a  fine  sturdy  fellow, 
with  his  cheek  wadded  with  tobacco,  ejected  the  overflowings  of  his  mouth,  and  his 
bitterness  against  the  comptrollers  of  taxes,  and  the  price  of  cheese  and  bacon,  with  a 
degree  of  force  which  required  all  our  ingenuity  to  parry  and  evade. 

After  a  run  of  about  fifteen  miles  we  arrived  off  New  Key  Head,  a  promontory  of 
slate  rock,  with  its  front  singularly  hacked  and  furrowed  by  rents  or  seams  intersecting  each 
other  in  all  directions,  and  exhibiting  an  indescribable  variety  of  rude  forms.  The  scene 
was  varied,  but  not  much  enlivened,  by  a  group  of  cormorants  which  were  sitting  on  the 
ledges  of  the  rocks,  and  as  we  supposed  in  the  agony  and  helplessness  of  overcharged 
stomachs,  for  not  all  the  efforts  of  our  combined  lungs  could  intimidate  them  into  motion. 
If  it  had  been  a  matter  of  duty  to  rouse  them,  I  know  not  what  perseverance  might  have 
accomplished  for  us;  but  their  obstinacy  outlived  our  amusement,  so  we  left  them  to  their 
digestion.  Under  shelter  of  New  Key  Head  is  the  harbour  of  New  Key,  which  is  very 
small,  but  much  easier  of  approach  than  that  of  Cardigan :  it  is  frequented  chiefly  by 
colliers  from  the  southern  counties  of  Wales :  coals  constitute  the  most  material  articles 
of  importation  in  all  the  harbours  on  this  coast,  none  having  ever  been  discovered  in  any 
part  of  the  county. 

As  there  was  nothing  at  this  place  that  required  very  serious  consideration,  we  made 
but  a  short  pause,  and  acceding  to  the  assertion  of  our  boatmen,  that  the  tide  waits  for 
nobody,  again  set  sail,  and  hastened  in  perfect  earnest  towards  a  port  for  the  night. 
In  about  an  hour  we  entered  the  river  Aeron,  and  landed  at  Aberearon,  a  small  village  on 

its 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  141 

its  northern  bank,  and  at  a  short  distance  from  its  mouth.  We  found  here  a  very  com- 
fortable inn,  which,  among  the  honours  of  the  place,  should  undoubtedly  be  men- 
tioned first,  as  it  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind  on  the  coast,  in  the  interval  between  Car- 
digan and  Aberystwith.  The  whole  village  has  an  appearance  of  great  neatness  and 
comfort  about  it,  and  is  set  off  by  a  combination  of  very  pleasing  scenery.  The  river 
winds  through  a  cheerful  and  well-cultivated  valley,  interspersed  with  wood  of  no  very 
stately  growth,  but  sufficient,  in  the  eyes  of  coast-travellers,  to  give  it  an  effect  of  unusual 
richness  and  warmth.  There  is  a  bridge  across  the  river  near  the  village,  which,  seen  in 
various  points  of  view  with  the  cottages  and  the  objects  around  them,  adds  very  much 
to  the  account  of  the  picturesque.  The  river  affords  a  harbour  to  a  few  small  vessels 
belonging  to  the  port,  which  are  employed  principally  as  colliers :  limestone  also  is  im- 
ported and  burned  in  a  kiln  at  the  river's  mouth,  which  has  given  rise  to  a  settlement  of 
two  or  three  cottages  subordinate  to  the  larger  village  above.  These  truly  are  very  small 
matters,  and  might  perhaps  have  been  omitted  without  discredit  to  my  judgment 
in  selection ;  but  I  have  at  least  the  satisfaction  of  feeling,  that,  in  my  account  of 
Aberaeron,  I  have  not  only  told  the  truth,  but  the  whole  truth. 

We  continued  our  voyage  in  our  boat,  and  arrived,  without  having  observed  any 
object  for  commemoration  by  the  way,  at  Llan  Dewi  Aberarth,  a  village  about  two  miles 
to  the  eastward  of  Aberaeron,  from  which  it  is  distinguished  more  by  this  difference  of 
place,  than  by  any  other  circumstances  of  scenery  and  situation.  If  the  villages  were  to 
change  places  in  the  night,  the  respective  inhabitants  of  each,  being  from  long  familiarity 
well  acquainted  with  all  the  signs  of  their  neighbourhood,  might  wake  in  the  morning  and 
instantly  make  the  discovery ;  but  the  novelty  of  the  arrangement  would  not  be  glaring 
enough  to  throw  the  mere  general  remarks  of  a  tourist  into  any  material  disorder.  Llan 
Dewi  Aberarth  stands  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  river,  the  Arth,  and  consists  of  a  cluster  of 
neat,  clean  cottages :  the  river  is  crossed  by  a  pretty  bridge,  which  enters  into  every  view  of 
the  village,  and  is  a  leading  mark  in  its  resemblance  to  Aberaeron.  The  village  is  nearer 
to  the  sea  than  the  latter,  and  the  river  and  valley  of  Arth  are  more  circumscribed  than 
those  of  Aeron ;  but  these  and  a  few  other  points  of  disagreement  occur  to  me  only  in 
drawing  a  parallel,  and  would  not  otherwise  have  made  parts  of  my  description,  which 
would  naturally  have  rested  upon  the  broad  and  common  features  of  both  places — a 
village,  a  valley,  a  river,  and  a  bridge.  The  valleys  both  of  Aeron  and  Arth  are  inclosed 
by  lofty  hills,  but  they  are  naked  and  stony,  and  not  distinguished  by  any  variety  or 
grandeur  in  their  forms  to  impress  the  mind  with  any  thing  but  their  barrenness.  The 
term  barrenness  requires  perhaps  some  little  qualification ;  a  few  sheep  on  the  sides  of  the 
hills  betrayed  that  something  grew  there,  but  it  had  so  little  of  the  cast  and  colour  of 
ordinary  vegetation,  that  it  was  not  more  agreeable  to  our  eyes,  whatever  it  may  have  been 
to  the  sheep's  mouths,  than  bare  rock.  A  man  who  is  covered  with  nothing  but  rags  and 

patches 


142  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

patches  may  be  called  naked,  without  much  injustice  to  his  clothing,  when  it  is  com- 
pared with  the  comfortable  coats  and  breeches  of  other  people. 

The  name  of  Llan  Dewi  Aberarth  contains  syllables  enough  to  describe  almost  every 
thing  that  relates  to  the  place,  and  indeed  it  does  set  forth  a  very  material  part.  Llan 
Dewi  signifies  St.  David,  to  whom  the  church  of  the  village  is  dedicated,  and  Aberarth 
denotes  its  situation,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  The  names  of  places  in  Wales  are  very 
significant,  and  generally  either  describe  some  feature  of  their  natural  scenery,  or  are 
memorials  of  some  remarkable  person  or  event  connected  with  them.  I  made  a  point  in 
my  travels  through  the  country  of  getting  these  names  explained  to  me  whenever  I  could; 
and  if  they  did  not  always  gratify,  they  excited,  my  curiosity,  and  gave  hints  for  the 
direction  of  my  inquiries. 

On  quitting  Llan  Dewi  Aberarth  we  found  the  scene  of  the  day  before  exactly  copied 
in  that  around  us :  to  our  left  was  the  same  beautiful  and  boundless  expanse  of  sea,  and 
to  our  right  the  same  vast  barrier,  continued  to  the  remotest  visible  distance  in  an  undu- 
lating line  of  cliffs,  with  the  same  alternations  of  nakedness  and  vegetation  along  their 
front.  There  was  some  variation  in  the  weather,  which  it  may  be  permitted  me  to  define; 
for  to  talk  of  the  weather  when  one  has  nothing  else  to  talk  about,  is  a  matter  of  imme- 
morial and  universal  right.  The  wind  on  the  preceding  day  had  been  perfectly  fair  and 
moderate,  but  it  now  blew  hard  and  off  the  land,  reducing  us  to  some  perplexity  in  the 
management  of  our  boat :  if  we  preserved  a  bold  offing,  in  order  to  have  the  advantage  of 
its  full  and  uninterrupted  action,  there  was  a  probability  of  our  being  driven  quite  out  to 
sea;  if  we  steered  nearer  to  the  land,  it  came  in  such  sudden  and  violent  flaws,  that  there 
was  danger  of  upsetting ;  and  if  we  sneaked  close  under  the  cliffs,  it  deserted  us  altoge- 
ther. Between  this  choice  of  difficulties  we  did  not  hesitate  long,  but  decided  upon  the 
last  mode  of  proceeding,  which,  though  the  slowest,  was  the  safest  of  the  three :  the  de- 
cision was  not  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  boatmen,  who  sat  down  to  row  with  a  very 
ill  grace,  thinking  it  quite  monstrous  that  they  should  be  within  view  of  a  fresh  breeze 
with  oars  in  their  hands,  implements  which  a  seaman  Avould  never  willingly  have  recourse 
to  but  in  the  last  extremity. 

It  was  nearly  dark  when  we  arrived  off  Aberystwith,  but  we  could  distinguish  that 
a  heavy  sea  was  breaking  upon  the  bar,  and  that  there  was  no  access  to  the  harbour. 
This  blockade  threw  us  into  some  anxiety  on  the  subject  of  finding  a  landing-place,  and 
the  more  so,  as  the  whole  shore  appeared  to  be  equally  defended  by  a  raging  surf.  To 
the  north  of  the  harbour  there  is  a  vast  projection  of  slate  rock,  black  and  craggy,  and 
girded  all  round  by  detached  fragments,  some  of  them  above  water,  and  many  concealed. 
Our  boatmen  thought  proper  to  steer  us  between  these  fragments  and  the  main  rock ;  and 
though  the  passage  was  intricate,  it  was  distinctly  pointed  out  by  the  breakers,  which 
were  roaring  on  all  sides  of  us.  The  whole  scene  was  exceedingly  wild  and  strange,  and 

Aberystwith 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  143 

Aberystwith  certainly  never  afterwards  appeared  to  us  in  so  amusing  a  point  of  view  as 
during  this  period  of  our  approach  to  it.  The  dim  and  uncertain  light  in  which  every 
object  was  seen,  threw  around  it  a  kind  of  mystery  which  gave  play  to  the  imagination  :  all 
the  forms  of  the  coast  appeared  new  and  inexplicable,  and  the  town,  discovered  by  a  few 
irregular  lights,  seemed  so  oddly  disposed,  that  we  were  as  much  puzzled  to  decide  upon 
the  nature  of  its  situation  as  the  mode  of  gaining  access  to  it.  To  detail  all  the  particu- 
lars of  a  scene  which  belonged  to  it  only  under  a  concurrence  of  incidental  circum- 
stances would  be  idle,  nor  indeed  would  it  be  easy  to  set  forth  in  any  intelligible  order 
a  twentieth  part  of  what  we  saw,  or  imagined  we  saw,  when  in  this  state  of  darkness  and 
illusion. 

That  I  may  not  incur  the  suspicion  of  making  dangers  in  order  to  describe  them,  I 
will  not  dilate  further  on  the  difficulties  of  our  passage,  particularly  as  they  were  not 
enlivened  by  any  kind  of  accident,  but  acknowledge  at  once  that  we  landed  in  safety  on 
a  sandy  beach  at  the  north  side  of  the  projecting  rock.  Morning  dissipated  all  our 
doubts,  and  shewed  us  Aberystwith  as  it  is.  The  town  stands  on  a  gentle  eminence  in 
the  centre  of  a  valley,  and  close  to  its  termination  in  the  sea.  The  valley  discloses  a  very 
small  opening,  and  on  each  side  of  it  the  hills  are  of  vast  height,  but  round  and  heavy  in 
their  outline,  except  along  the  coast,  where  they  terminate  in  broken  precipices  of  rock. 
The  town  is  bounded  on  the  south  side  by  two  rivers,  the  Rhydol  and  Ystwyth,  which  both 
join  the  sea  nearly  at  the  same  place,  but  in  distinct  streams,  a  few  hundred  yards  below  it. 
The  Rhydol  flows  between  the  town  and  the  Ystwyth,  and  should,  by  right  of  this  inter- 
vention, have  given  it  its  name ;  but  probably  when  Aberystwith  first  gained  its  title, 
the  rivers  were  united  here  in  a  common  mouth,  which  may  have  been  called  Ystwyth 
or  Rhydol  indifferently.  They  both  bring  down  great  quantities  of  sand  and  mud  in 
their  course,  and  this  deposition  may  have  effected  their  present  disunion. 

The  town  of  Aberystwith  is  decidedly  one  of  the  neatest  and  most  respectable  in  its 
appearance  of  any  in  Wales ;  its  streets  (two  streets  are  included  in  this  description)  are  of 
good  breadth  and  well  paved,  and  its  houses  are,  some  of  them,  very  good,  and  all  of  them 
perfectly  tenantable.  Like  many  other  coast  towns,  it  has  assumed  altogether  a  new 
face  within  the  last  twenty  years,  and  owes  all  its  improvements  to  its  recommendations 
as  a  bathing  place.  This  modern  fashion  of  sea-bathing  raises  towns  with  unexampled 
rapidity,  and  lays  out  streets  of  stone,  and  builds  houses  of  brick,  in  places  which  seemed 
by  a  natural  and  invincible  obscurity  to  be  doomed  to  an  eternity  of  unpaved  lanes  and 
mud  walls.  I  was  conversing  about  the  former  state  of  this  place  with  one  of  the  native 
inhabitants,  who  seemed  yet  not  quite  familiar  with  the  sudden  magnificence  which  had 
started  up  about  him,  and  he  told  me,  that  if  twenty  years  ago  it  had  been  proposed  to 
him  to  mention  the  thing,  which  of  all  others  he  conceived  most  unlikely  ever  to  be,  he 
should  have  said,  if  so  strange  a  thought  could  possibly  have  entered  his  head,  a  play- 

u  house 


144  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

house  at  Aberystwith.     More  unthought-of  things  have   happened  since  the  days  of 
Cadwalader,  but  not  at  Aberystwith. 

To  the  northward  of  the  castle-rock  there  is  a  small  bay,  which  affords  a  convenient 
arena  for  bathers :  it  is  not  more  than  two  or  three  hundred  yards  in  length  ;  but  is  of  in- 
estimable value  to  the  town,  being  the  only  spot  on  the  shore  which  is  not  protected  by  a 
bottom  of  rough,  sharp  rocks  from  the  intrusion  of  naked  feet.  This  hospitable  little 
recess  is  a  refuge  also  to  the  fishermen,  who  may  land  here  without  danger  to  themselves 
or  their  boats,  when  they  are  excluded  by  the  bar,  or  the  surf  upon  it,  from  the  harbour. 
It  was  here  that  we  first  felt,  and  with  more  than  common  satisfaction,  the  firm  and  dry 
ground  under  us,  after  our  perplexed  and  perilous  passage  of  the  preceding  evening. 

The  trade  of  Aberystwith,  as  far  as  the  town  is  concerned,  is  trifling ;  but  its  port  is  the 
outlet  for  the  produce  of  the  surrounding  country,  which  is  very  considerable.  Its  exports 
are  lead  and  calamine,  procured  from  the  mines  near  Plinlimmon,  oak  bark,  and  various 
manufactured  goods,  such  as  webs,  flannels,  stockings,  &c.  Its  imports  have  been  much  in- 
creased of  late  by  the  influx  of  strangers :  they  consist  chiefly  of  grain  and  groceries,  brought 
from  Liverpool  and  Bristol,  and  coals  from  the  southern  counties  of  Wales.  No  vessels 
of  large  burden  can  have  access  to  Aberystwith,  there  being  only  fourteen  feet  of  water 
on  the  bar  at  high  spring  tides.  The  interior  of  the  harbour  is  well  sheltered,  but  the 
entrance  is  exceedingly  dangerous.  This  fact  was  brought  home  to  our  conviction  by  the 
sight  of  a  stranded  vessel  which  had  been  wrecked  in  the  gale  that  blew  while  we  were  at 
Tenby,  and  was  lying  on  a  bank  of  pebbles  close  to  the  harbour's  mouth,  with  one  of  her 
sides  battered  in  from  stem  to  stern,  and  with  her  masts,  and  sails,  and  rigging  scattered 
in  dismal  ruin  about  her.  She  was  a  Portuguese  ship  from  the  Brazils,  bound  to  Liver- 
pool, and  had  been  surprised  by  the  gale,  when  she  was  so  near  to  the  land  that  no  exer- 
tions could  keep  her  off  the  shore.  We  understood,  that  had  the  captain  been  acquainted 
with  the  nature  of  the  harbour,  she  might,  as  there  was  at  the  time  an  unusual  depth  of 
water,  possibly  have  been  saved ;  but  there  is  nothing  that  can  indicate  to  a  stranger  its 
proper  channel,  which  is  so  narrow,  that  in  bad  weather  it  requires  the  utmost  skill  of  the 
most  experienced  pilots  to  guide  a  vessel  into  it  with  safety.  A  small  brig  from  Ireland 
was  wrecked  at  the  same  time,  and  nearly  on  the  same  spot ;  but  she  was  so  completely 
dashed  to  pieces,  that  we  saw  but  a  few  fragments  of  her  remaining.  The  crews  of  both 
vessels  were  saved  ;  but  the  cargoes  of  both  were  entirely  lost. 

The  crew  of  the  Portuguese  ship  were  still  at  Aberystwith  when  we  were  there,  and  I 
was  attracted  by  a  little  crowd  to  the  door  of  a  miserable  kind  of  outhouse,  into  which  they 
were  all  crammed,  to  the  number  of  eight  or  ten,  and  in  a  state  of  ineffable  filth  and  wretch- 
edness. There  was  a  large  fire  on  the  ground,  the  smoke  from  which  diffused  itself  in  a 
thick  fog  all  over  the  place,  and  through  this  medium  I  could  just  distinguish  a  strange 
confusion  of  trunks  and  lumber  from  the  wreck,  and  the  men,  some  smoking,  some  sleep- 
ing, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  145 

ing,  and  some  cooking,  with  a  host  of  monkies  screaming  and  chattering  about  them,  and 
all  jumbled  together  in  a  hole  not  more  than  twelve  feet  square.  Their  lodging  here  was 
probably  in  no  degree  worse  than  in  the  forecastle  of  their  vessels ;  but  certainly  common 
humanity  required  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  should  have  given  people,  and 
especially  foreigners,  who  had  just  escaped  from  the  horrors  of  shipwreck,  a  more  hos- 
pitable reception. 

Aberystwith,  during  the  wars  between  England  and  Wales,  was  a  military  station, 
and  was  defended  by  a  castle,  of  which  there  are  still  some  remains.  They  stand  on  the 
bold  projection  of  rock,  which  I  have  before  described  ;  and  though  they  are  so  much 
dilapidated  that  the  imagination  has  mere  exercise  than  the  eye  in  the  combination  of 
their  forms,  yet  they  have  still  some  positive  majesty  left,  and,  uniting  with  a  fine  view  of 
rocks  and  sea,  are  very  picturesque.  The  most  perfect  part  is  a  lofty  square  tower ;  the 
remainder  lies  tumbled  about  in  confused  fragments,  as  if  scattered  by  the  force  of  gun- 
powder. The  castle  is  completely  commanded  by  neighbouring  heights,  and  therefore 
can  never  have  been  of  any  consideration  as  a  military  post  since  the  use  of  artillery ;  but 
before  that  period,  its  situation  on  a  peninsula,  guarded  on  three  sides  by  abrupt  rocks, 
must  have  rendered  it  a  place  of  uncommon  strength.  This  fortress  was  first  founded  in 
the  year  1109,  by  Gilbert  Strongbow,  who  at  that  time  had  received  a  grant  from  King 
Henry  the  First  of  all  the  lands  and  inheritance  of  Cadogan  ap  Bleddyn,  with  the  usual 
proviso,  if  he  could  win  them,  which  he  managed  to  do  without  much  difficulty.  The 
plea  for  this  act  of  usurpation  was,  that  Cadogan  was  unable  to  repress  the  turbulence  of 
his  son  Owen,  a  hero  of  whom  I  transcribed  some  particulars  in  my  account  of  Pembroke 
castle,  and  who,  it  may  be  remembered,  was  very  active  in  his  hostilities  against  the 
king's  subjects  in  Wales,  and  usually  retired,  after  his  marauding  expeditions,  to  the  land 
of  his  father,  and  there  remained  till  the  ferment  which  he  had  raised  had  subsided,  and 
he  could  again  sally  forth  with  security  on  some  new  scheme  of  mischief  and  plunder. 
"  If  you  cannot  keep  your  son  away  from  your  estates,"  observed  the  king  to  Cadogan, 
"  I  must  give  them  to  somebody  who  can*;"  and  this  was  at  least  as  good  an  apology 
as  he  could  advance  for  any  of  his  seizures  in  Wales. 

Gilbert  and  his  followers  maintained  their  new  possessions  for  some  time ;  but  not 
without  frequent  and  violent  opposition  from  the  Welsh.  In  the  year  1135,  Cadwalader 
and  Owen  Gwyneth,  sons  of  Gruffydd  ap  Conan,  Prince  of  North  Wales,  co  lected  a  large 
force,  and  took  and  burned  the  castle;  and  after  the  destruction  of  this  strong  hold, 
succeeded,  with  the  co-operation  of  Gruffydd  ap  Rhys,  and  some  other  chieftains,  in 
entirely  expelling  the  usurpers,  and  reinstating  the  native  inhabitants.  The  castle  was 
restored  by  Cadwalader,  but  was  not  permitted  to  stand  idle,  even  when  the  country  was 
undisturbed  by  invaders ;  for  the  Welsh  had  so  sharpened  their  taste  for  fighting,  by  their 
encounters  with  the  Normans,  that  when  they  were  expelled  they  could  not  resist  the 

*  History  of  Cambria,  by  D.  Powel. 

u  2  temptation 


14O  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

tetnptation  of  skirmishing  a  little  with  one  another.  In  this  spirit  Cadwalader  attacked 
and  slew  Anarawd,  the  son  of  Gruffydd  ap  Rhys,  who  appears  not  to  have  been  ill 
inclined  for  the  fray,  and  who  thus  fell  a  victim  to  some  petty  personal  quarrel,  with  valour 
and  ability  enough,  according  to  the  historian,  to  have  maintained  the  independence  of 
his  country.  This  event  led  to  other  scenes  of  tumult  and  blood ;  Owen  Gwyneth,  then 
Prince  of  North  Wales,  enraged  at  the  loss  of  Anarawd,  directed  all  his  power  against 
his  brother,  and  spread  devastation  over  his  lands,  and  destroyed  his  castle  at  Aberyst- 
with.  During  more  than  a  century  after  this  period  the  castle  continued  to  experience 
the  same  sudden  revolutions,  and  rose  and  fell,  sometimes  in  the  cause  of  freedom,  and 
often  as  it  pleased  the  caprice,  the  cruelty,  the  pride,  or  the  revenge  of  any  petty  tyrant  of 
the  moment.  It  was  last  rebuilt  or  repaired  by  Edward  the  First,  in  the  year  1278,  imme- 
diately after  he  had  concluded  a  peace  with  the  brave  and  unfortunate  Lhewelyn,  by  the 
terms  of  which  he  had  compelled  him  to  give  up  the  liberty  of  his  country.  The  intoler- 
able oppressions  of  the  king's  officers  in  Wales  did  not  allow  the  peace  to  be  of  long 
duration,  and  the  people  determined  to  make  another  effort  for  their  independence. 
Among  the  short  and  unavailing  successes  which  preceded  their  final  subjection  was  the 
capture  of  this  newly-erected  castle  at  Aberystwith.  During  the  civil  wars  it  was  garri- 
soned for  King  Charles ;  but  speedily  yielded  to  the  forces  of  the  parliament,  and  was  by 
them  destroyed. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  ruins  is  a  building  of  modern  creation,  a  strange  kind  of  tiling, 
intended  to  look  like  a  castle.  The  ancient  castle,  no  doubt,  suggested  the  first  idea  to  the 
contriver  of  this  its  unworthy  successor ;  but  not  having  occasion  for  a  house  of  more  than 
moderate  dimensions,  his  idea  has  had  no  room  for  expansion,  and  has  become  embodied 
in  a  cramped  combination  of  towers  and  bastions,  that  might  have  been  almost  as  well  ex- 
pressed in  wax.  Great  deviations  have  been  made  from  the  common  style  of  architecture 
in  domestic  buildings,  in  order  to  produce  an  appearance  of  grandeur;  but  the  object  has 
altogether  failed,  and  many  conveniences  of  a  dwelling-house  have  been  sacrificed  to 
forms,  which,  after  all,  are  perfectly  insignificant.  We  admit,  in  this  land  of  freedom, 
that  a  man's  house  is  his  castle ;  but  I  must  say,  that  in  this  instance  a  most  licentious 
advantage  has  been  taken  of  this  concession. 

In  enumerating  the  attractions  of  Aberystwith  I  should  make  a  sad  omission  Avere  I 
to  forget  the  Castle-walk,  where  all  the  visitors  spend  at  least  one-third  of  their  time,  and 
where,  of  course,  may  be  seen,  in  whatever  proportion  they  may  happen  to  be,  '  all  the 
beauty  and  fashion  of  the  place.'  The  walk  is  a  very  agreeable  one,  commanding  a 
beautiful  coast  prospect,  and  of  immense  extent.  Aberystwith  is  situated  nearly  in  the 
centre  of  Cardigan  bay,  which  includes  the  whole  coast  of  Cardigan  and  Merioneth,  and 
the  southern  coast  of  Carnarvonshire.  Its  points  are  formed  by  Cardigan  island  to  the 
south,  and  Bardsey  island  to  the  north,  and  the  semicircle  drawn  from  them  comprehends 
a  line  of  coast  of  more  than  a  hundred  miles  in  extent.  The  view  of  this  vast  curve 

from 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  147 

from  the  castle  rock  is  exceedingly  magnificent;  in  clear  weather  it  is  visible  to  its 
extremities ;  but  on  the  north  side,  where  the  coast  is  low,  the  tremendous  mountains  of 
Carnarvonshire  appear  to  be  advanced  into  the  sea,  and  to  rise  from  it  like  islands. 

From  the  heights  near  Aberystwith  we  caught  our  first  glimpse  of  the  mountain 
scenery,  and  having  the  benefit  of  a  clear  day,  we  had  in  view,  from  one  point,  the  three 
celebrated  mountains,  which,  with  their  dependencies,  fill  up  one  vast  chain  from  the 
southern  to  the  northern  extremity  of  North  Wales.  To  the  north-east  appeared  Plin- 
limmon,  whose  base  is  in  Cardiganshire,  but  his  bald  summit  in  Montgomeryshire ;  to 
the  north,  distant  about  thirty  miles,  was  the  summit  of  Cader  Idris,  in  Merioneth;  and 
nearly  in  the  same  direction,  at  the  distance  of  fifty  miles,  appeared  the  peak  of  Snow- 
don,  in  Carnarvonshire,  but  just  distinguishable,  and  rising  like  a  cloud  above  the  horizon. 
They  were  all  too  much  obscured  by  distance  for  us  to  appreciate  their  real  sublimity, 
but  they  constitute  such  sovereign  features  in  the  scenery  of  the  country,  and  are  so 
familiarized  by  report,  that  the  curiosity  of  a  traveller  is  on  the  stretch  in  every  stage 
of  his  approach  to  them,  and  he  notes  that  as  a  memorable  spot  from  whence  they  first 
appeared  in  sight. 

We  hired  a  boat  at  Aberystwith  to  take  us  to  Barmouth,  a  voyage  of  two  days.  In 
all  our  dealings  with  boatmen,  from  the  period  of  our  initiatory  cruize  at  the  Land's-End, 
we  had  discovered  on  their  part  an  uniform  disposition  to  cheat,  which  at  Aberystwith 
was  advanced  to  its  highest  pitch  of  extravagance.  We  resisted  it  for  some  time,  but 
without  success ;  for  our  adversaries  here,  in  addition  to  other  arguments,  pleaded  the 
privileges  of  a  watering-place,  and  triumphed  over  all  opposition  by  proving  that  they 
demanded  no  more  from  us  than  they  had  been  paid  by  other  people.  The  influx  of  idlers, 
with  money  in  their  pockets,  soon  corrupts  the  simple  honesty  of  the  native  inhabitants, 
and  opens  to  them  new  sources  of  gain,  which  quite  alter  the  temper  of  their  minds,  and 
render  them  dissatisfied  with  rewards  which  are  merely  proportioned  to  their  industry.  The 
visitors  at  watering-places,  even  those  who  are  not  included  in  the  class  of  mere  squan- 
derers, resort  to  them  for  the  sake  of  a  temporary  remission  of  all  care,  and,  of  course, 
prepare  themselves  for  some  relaxation  in  the  rigour  of  their  ordinary  economy.  This 
disposition  holds  out  opportunities  and  facilities  of  extortion  to  those  who  contribute  to 
their  wants  and  amusements,  and  they  are  regarded  by  them  as  willing  dupes,  who 
devote  an  annual  season  of  three  months  to  the  sea-side,  that  they  may  dissipate  those 
superfluities  which  nine  months  of  extravagance  in  other  places  have  left  them.  A 
cottage  in  Wales  formerly  raised  an  image  of  retirement,  at  least  as  cheap  as  it  was 
romantic.  I  know  not  in  what  part  of  the  principality  it  would  now  be  found  to  include 
these  combined  recommendations,  but  certainly  not  on  the  coast. 

We  were  launched  into  the  sea  from  the  same  friendly  beach  to  which  we  had  been 
so  much  obliged  on  the  night  of  our  landing  at  Aberystwith  :  it  is  bounded  by  a  project- 
ing crag,  from  whence  the  coast  is  continued  to  the  northward  in  a  long  range  of  perpen- 
dicular 


148  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

dicular  cliffs  of  slate  rock,  not  so  lofty  as  those  to  the  southward  of  the  town,  and  along 
their  whole  front  perfectly  bare  of  earth  or  vegetation.  Some  clefts  and  caverns  at  their 
base,  worn  by  the  dashing  of  the  sea,  an  overhanging  rock,  apparently  in  the  very  article  of 
falling,  and  some  other  curiosities,  were  recommended  to  our  wonder;  but  these  we  had 
seen  so  much  surpassed  in  their  qualities  of  the  wonderful,  among  other  scenes  of  rock, 
that  they  made  but  little  impression  upon  us.  At  the  distance  of  about  three  miles  to  the 
northward  of  Aberystwith  we  found  ourselves  on  the  edge  of  a  dangerous  shoal,  called 
Sarn  Cynfelyn,  which  extends  three  miles  from  the  shore,  in  a  westerly  direction :  it  is 
separated  by  a  sound  half  a  mile  wide  from  another  shoal,  called  the  Patches,  which  is  at 
least  six  miles  in  length,  and  lies  also  east  and  west.  Sarn  Cynfelyn  is  left  dry  at  low  water 
for  the  space  of  a  mile  from  the  shore,  and  in  very  low  ebbs  the  extremity  of  the  Patches, 
which  adjoins  the  sound,  is  also  partially  dry.  The  bottom  of  both  of  them  is  composed  of 
large  and  small  pebbles,  very  unequally  spread,  sometimes  rising  within  a  foot  of  the  surface 
of  the  water,  and  at  the  distance  of  a  few  yards  sinking  to  the  depth  of  seven  or  eight 
feet.  Some  of  the  masses  which  rise  so  near  to  the  surface  are  sharp  and  angular,  and  are 
probably  portions  of  the  solid  rock  protruded  through  the  bed  of  pebbles.  Nine  miles  to 
the  northward  of  these  shoals,  and  close  to  the  mouth  of  the  little  river  Disynwy,  there  is 
another,  called  Sam  y  Bwch,  which  adjoins  the  shore,  and  runs  out  from  it  nearly  four  miles 
into  the  sea ;  and  eleven  miles  still  further  north  there  is  another,  the  largest  and  most 
dreaded  of  them  all,  called  Sarn  Badrig,  or  the  Ship-breaking  Causeway,  from  the  numerous 
vessels  which  have  been  wrecked  upon  it.  This  latter  is  about  six  leagues  in  length,  but 
no  where  more  than  half  a  mile  broad,  except  at  the  west  end  :  its  eastern  extremity  lies 
nearly  a  mile  from  the  shore,  and  at  low  spring  tides  is  dry  to  an  extent  of  two  or  three 
miles.  When  vessels  are  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  edge  of  Sarn  Badrig  the  compass 
is  found  to  be  strongly  affected  by  magnetism.  All  these  shoals  lie  nearly  in  parallel  lines, 
and  are  all  composed  of  pebbles,  interspersed  with  larger  masses  of  rock.  According  to 
tradition  the  whole  of  this  part  of  Cardigan  bay  was  once  habitable  ground,  known  by  the 
name  of  Cantre'r  Gwaelod,  or  the  Lowland  Hundred,  which  was  overwhelmed  by  an 
irruption  of  the  sea  in  the  year  500*. 

As  we  were  passing  over  Sarn  Cynfelyn,  our  boatmen  did  not  appear  to  have  the 
least  knowledge  of  which  were  the  safest  parts  of  the  channel ;  but  when  we  arrived 
at  the  edge  of  the  shoal,  one  of  them  sprung  to  the  head  of  the  boat,  with  a  long  pole  in 
his  hand,  and  sounded  the  depth  of  water  as  fast  as  possible;  at  the  same  time  communi- 
cating its  variations  with  a  countenance  of  great  anxiety,  and  in  a  hurried  voice,  to  the 
helmsman.  We  were  extremely  uncomfortable  during  the  whole  of  this  uncertain  pass- 
age, and,  as  the  word  was  given,  felt  our  hearts  rise  or  fall  by  the  fathom  ;  for,  as  we 
were  going  through  the  water  with  considerable  rapidity*  a  hole  would  in  all  probability 

*  Pennant. 

have 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  149 

have  been  forced  through  the  boat,  had  she  struck  the  bottom,  and  then — but  I  forbear 
to  dwell  on  the  consequences  of  an  accident  which  did  not  happen.  It  may  appear 
strange  that  these  men  should  have  been  so  little  improved  by  experience  in  a  latitude  within 
three  miles  of  their  own  harbour ;  but  we  had  on  other  occasions  met  with  instances  of 
ignorance  equally  inexcusable  among  Welsh  boatmen,  who  are  generally  by  no  means 
so  remarkable  for  skill,  and  intrepidity,  which  is  the  result  of  skill,  as  the  boatmen  on 
most  parts  of  the  English  coast.  I  refer  their  inferiority,  not  to  any  natural  incapacity, 
but  to  a  want  of  proper  practice  in  their  art.  The  fisheries,  the  best  schools  for  seamen, 
are  all  on  a  very^  limited  scale  in  Wales ;  and  the  boats  used  in  the  service  are  so  small, 
that  the  men  dare  not  venture  to  sea  in  them,  except  in  fine  weather,  and  are  therefore 
shut  out  from  all  opportunity  of  becoming  familiar  with  those  difficulties  and  dangers  that 
make  a  bold  and  able  seaman.  I  never  saw  a  fishing-boat  on  the  Welsh  coast  that  was 
longer  than  a  Thames  wherry,  or  much  better  calculated  to  resist  the  force  of  a  gale  of 
wind  at  sea.  The  bays  of  Caermarthen,  Fishguard,  and  Cardigan,  and  many  others,  are 
amply  stored  with  the  best  kinds  of  fish;  but  these  are  neglected  by  the  inhabitants 
along  shore,  who  attend  exclusively  to  the  herring  fishery,  and  they  prosecute  even 
this  so  feebly,  that  they  barely  secure  enough  for  their  own  consumption.  I  imagine 
that  poverty  is  the  cause  of  this  indolence  and  want  of  adventure,  and  that  the  people 
would  willingly  engage  in  more  extended  concerns,  had  they  the  necessary  means.  To  fit 
out  a  large  boat,  with  its  full  appointment  of  nets  and  other  apparatus,  requires  a  consi- 
derable sum  of  money.  I  have  seen,  in  the  mackarel  season,  a  fleet  of  nearly  two  hundred 
boats  put  to  sea  in  an  evening  from  Broad-stairs,  on  the  coast  of  Kent,  the  value  of  each 
of  which,  with  all  her  gear,  might  be  estimated,  on  an  average,  at  150/.  The  fishermen 
here,  and  on  most  parts  of  the  English  coast,  have  resources  independent  of  the  fisheries, 
which  enable  them  to  provide  these  expensive  equipments.  To-  almost  every  harbour  of 
any  importance  there  are  attached  three  or  four  boats  of  very  great  burden,  which  are 
employed  in  the  winter  time  to  assist  vessels  in  distress,  and  which,  though  merely  open 
boats,  are  capable,  when  well  manned,  and  skilfully  worked,  of  bearing  all  weathers :  I 
have  myself  seen  them  off  Deal  and  Dover  turning  to  windward  when  not  a  ship  in  the 
channel  could  carry  sail.  This  business,  by  the  number  of  our  vessels,  and  the  dangers 
of  our  shores,  is  made  exceedingly  lucrative ;  a  good  job,  as  it  is  called  by  those  engaged, 
such  as  getting  a  vessel  off  the  shore,  or  steering  her  safely  into  port  after  the  loss  of  her 
anchors  or  her  rudder,  sometimes  realizing  for  each  man  a  reward  of  fifty,  sixty,  or  a 
hundred  pounds.  These  large  boats  are  usually  the  property  of  a  few  rich  individuals ; 
but  by  the  harbour  laws  every  seafaring  person  of  the  place  to  which  they  belong  is 
entitled  to  work  in  them,  and  the  benefits  of  them  are  thus  widely  and  equally  distri- 
buted, and  procure  for  every  fisherman  a  little  capital  for  his  business  in  the  summer 
season.  There  are  no  boats  of  this  description  on  the  Welsh  coast,  consequently  the 
fishermen  here  have  little  or  no  employment  in  the  winter  time;  and  if  they  can  save  from 

the 


150  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  profits  of  the  summer  a  meagre  subsistence  for  this  hard  season,  they  have  no  chance 
of  laying  any  thing  by  for  the  extension  and  improvement  of  their  business. 

But  it  is  time  to  be  moving.  When  we  had  passed  over  Sarn  Cynfelyn,  no  further 
obstruction  occurred  to  disturb  the  placidity  of  our  navigation,  and  we  glided  smoothly 
on  close  to  the  rocks,  among  which  we  observed  nothing  of  sufficient  novelty  for  remark. 
After  a  passage  of  about  three  leagues,  we  entered  the  estuary  of  the  Dovey,  which 
makes  a  Avide  opening  in  the  land,  and  discloses  a  noble  view  of  the  mountains  on  each 
side,  gradually  converging  till  they  seem  to  meet  at  their  bases,  and  block  up  the 
valley.  The  Dovey  is  the  boundary  between  North  and  South  Wales,  and  at  high  water 
spreads  for  more  than  a  mile  above  its  mouth  into  a  fine  river,  nearly  a  mile  in  breadth. 
Cardiganshire  terminates  at  its  mouth  in  a  naked  flat,  but  bounded  at  a  short  distance  by 
hills,  which  are  continued  in  a  bold  range  along  the  south  side  of  the  river,  though  far 
overtopped  by  the  heights  of  Merionethshire,  which  rise  on  the  opposite  side.  We  were 
now  near  enough  to  these  grand  mountains  to  see  them  in  their  full  majesty,  and  their 
vastness,  and  the  strange  confusion  in  which  they  are  tumbled  together,  and  the  multi- 
plied forms  of  their  sides  and  summits,  were  all  distinctly  exhibited.  My  friend  was 
familiar  with  mountain  scenery ;  but  to  me  it  was  perfectly  new :  the  first  impres- 
sion which  it  fixed  in  my  mind  I  could  not  very  readily  explain,  and  though  a  pre- 
cedent might  not  be  wanting  for  such  an  act,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  relieve  myself  by 
a  quotation. 

We  landed  at  Aberdovey,  a  village  of  twenty  or  thirty  cottages,  ranged  in  a  row 
near  the  water's  edge.  There  was  little  about  it  that  courted  our  notice  or  enquiries.  A 
few  vessels  belong  to  it  which  import  coals  and  limestone,  and  export  bark  and  other 
produce  of  the  valley,  together  with  some  manufactured  articles  of  woollen.  Almost 
every  farmer  in  the  valley  makes  webs,  and  there  are  few  cottages  without  a  loom ;  but 
the  most  considerable  establishment  for  all  kinds  of  woollen  goods  is  at  Machynlleth  :  the 
river  is  navigable  as  high  up  as  this  place  for  small  craft,  which  bring  down  goods  to  be 
shipped  at  Aberdovey.  The  harbour  is  safe  and  convenient  for  vessels  drawing  not  more 
than  eight  or.  nine  feet  water,  and  they  may  either  ride  afloat  at  all  times  of  tide  Avithin 
fifty  yards  of  the  shore,  or  ground  without  danger  on  a  smooth  sand  close  to  the  village. 
The  entrance,  like  that  of  every  harbour  in  Cardigan  bay,  is  rendered  dangerous  by 
shifting  sands,  and  a  bar  which  at  neap  tides  is  passable  only  for  boats. 

It  was  necessary  that  our  boat  should  bring  up  at  Aberdovey  for  the  night ;  but  on 
an  intimation  that  we  should  procure  more  comfortable  accommodations  at  Towyn,  a  few 
miles  further  north,  we  determined,  as  we  had  an  hour  or  two  of  daylight  remaining,  to 
walk  on.  To  the  northward  of  the  Dovey  the  coast  is  extended  in  a  long  flat  sand, 
which  is  bounded  by  a  narrow  stripe  of  swampy  ground,  very  fertile  in  rushes,  and  be- 
yond this  rise  the  mountains.  We  had  now  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  Merionethshire 
chain,  extending  in  a  NNE.  direction,  and  bounded  to  our  sight  by  the  enormous  Cader 

Idris 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  151 

Idris,  whose  summit  appeared  quite  unclouded,  and  rising  in  a  sharp  ridge  above  every 
other  peak  of  the  range.  In  front  of  us  were  the  more  distant  mountains  of  Carnarvon- 
shire, occupying,  in  a  chain  at  right  angles  to  that  of  Merionethshire,  the  long  promon- 
tory which  forms  the  northern  horn  of  Cardigan  Bay.  This  vast  range  gradually  ascends 
from  its  south-western  extremity,  till  it  reaches  its  highest  elevation  in  the  pointed  summit 
of  Snowdon ;  the  chain  is  continued  to  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  Carnarvonshire,  and 
Snowdon  stands  in  the  centre ;  but,  from  our  point  of  observation,  his  towering  peak 
closed  the  view.  I  had  never  before  seen  any  thing  at  all  comparable  with  the  magnifi- 
cence of  the  scene  which  was  now  before  me.  Every  thing  around  us  accorded  with  its 
solemnity :  the  sun  was  sinking  in  the  west,  the  evening  was  calm  and  clear,  and  there 
was  a  deep  stillness  in  the  air,  which  forcibly  impressed  upon  the  mind  the  majesty  of 
nature,  exhibited  as  it  was  in  the  sublimest  images,  the  boundless  sea,  and  the  vast  and 
various  forms  of  these  awful  mountains.  The  dark  line  of  their  summits  was  marked 
along  the  sky  at  so  tremendous  an  elevation,  that  they  appeared  to  me  as  a  new  creation, 
and  I  could  scarcely  regard  them  as  parts  of  a  world  formed  for  the  use  of  man.  Those 
who  have  frequently  seen  these  or  still  vaster  mountains,  and  those  who  have  never  seen 
them  at  all,  may  not  acknowledge  the  propriety  of  these  feelings ;  but  they  may  perhaps 
be  understood  by  those  who,  like  me,  are  fresh  from  a  first  impression. 

A  walk  of  about  four  miles  along  the  sands  brought  us  to  the  edge  of  a  peat  moss, 
reaching,  it  is  said,  into  the  sea  to  an  unknown  extent ;  unknown,  I  imagine,  because  no 
attempts  have  been  made  to  define  it.  It  is  known  at  least  not  to  be  bounded  by  low- 
water  mark,  and  is  a  direct  proof  that  the  sea  has  made  encroachments  on  this  shore,  and 
countenances  the  traditional  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  Cantre'r  Gwaelod.  Part 
of  the  moss  remains  as  a  turbary,  and  part  has  been  reclaimed  and  laid  out  in  meadows 
and  corn  fields,  which  yield  tolerable  crops.  Another  mile,  leading  from  the  sea,  brought 
us  to  the  place  of  our  destination  at  Towyn,  where  our  anticipated  comforts  were  par- 
tially completed,  at  an  inn  established  here  for  the  accommodation  of  bathers.  The  town 
is  very  small,  and  the  houses,  built  of  a  coarse  schistose  stone  from  the  mountains, 
unhewn  and  angular,  have  a  most  uncouth  appearance.  The  flat  country  around  it, 
from  a  total  want  of  wood,  looks  cold  and  cheerless  ;  but  it  is  of  small  extent,  terminating 
to  the  west  in  the  sea,  and  to  the  east  in  the  majestic  mountains.  The  neighbourhood  of 
the  marsh  must,  I  conceive,  make  the  town  unhealthy  ;  but  I  was  not  permitted  to  whis- 
per such  an  apprehension  before  our  landlord,  who  declared,  that  there  was  no  where  a 
more  wholesome  air,  no,  nor  a  better  inn,  though  I  might  find  many  that  were  more 
arrogant  in  pretension.  We  learned,  however,  from  other  and  more  disinterested  autho- 
rity, that  the  marsh,  together  with  the  inconvenience  of  its  distance  from  the  sea,  had  of 
late  brought  Towyn  into  disrepute,  and  that  its  former  visitors  were  divided  between 
Aberystwith  and  Barmouth. 

Mr.  Pennant,  in  his  Welsh  Tour,  regrets  that  he  did  not  visit  this  place,  on  account 

x  ef 


152  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  some  antiquities  in  the  church,  which  he  conceived  to  be  worthy  of  inspection.  We 
searched  for  them,  but  without  success,  and  I  am  willing  to  believe  that  they  have  been 
removed,  rather  than  that  we  were  too  dull  to  recognise  them.  As  we  were  wandering 
about  the  church-yard,  we  unexpectedly  surprised  a  very  decent  looking  woman,  who  was 
bathing  her  feet  and  legs  in  a  well.  Our  curiosity  over-ruled  our  politeness,  and  we 
advanced  towards  her,  that  we  might  ascertain  what  were  the  properties  of  the  water ; 
but  she  seemed  unwilling  to  expose  her  credulity,  or  perhaps  her  legs,  and  would  hold  no 
conversation  with  us.  We  were  informed  at  the  inn,  that  this  water  possesses  some 
medicinal  qualities,  of  great  efficacy  in  many  and  very  opposite  diseases ;  its  virtue  is 
supposed  to  be  governed  by  some  unknown  and  miraculous  power  ;  but  it  is  rendered 
particularly  beneficial  in  some  cases  by  a  strong  mixture  of  sulphur. 

We  returned  in  the  morning  to  Aberdovy,  and  set  sail  for  Barmouth.  The  moun- 
tains were  the  attraction  that  engrossed  all  our  attention  during  our  passage,  particularly 
Cader  Idris,  and  indeed  the  wide-spreading  members  of  this  single  mountain  in  them- 
selves filled  up  a  vast  landscape,  and  appeared,  from  the  frequent  chasms  by  which  they 
are  divided,  more  like  a  series  of  individual  mountains,  rising  irregularly  one  above 
another,  than  the  basement  of  the  far-distant  ridge  which  towers  above  them.  A  cloudy 
sky  exhibited  the  scenery  under  numerous  and  rapid  changes  of  form  and  expression ;  the 
clouds  were  kept  in  motion  by  a  brisk  breeze,  and  played  about  the  mountains,  pro- 
ducing a  fanciful  and  inexhaustible  variety  of  effects,  either  as  they  rested  in  patches  on 
their  summits,  and  left  the  slopes  and  precipices  below  chequered  with  light  and  shade, 
or  settled  in  heavier  vapours  midway  down  their  sides,  and  shewed  the  summits  alone 
suspended  in  the  air  and  in  the  full  blaze  of  the  sun. 

We  soon  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  little  river  Disynwy,  which  joins  the  sea  about 
a  mile  to  the  northwest  of  Towyn :  here  we  were  almost  in  contact  with  Cader  Idris,  a 
circumstance  Avhich  I  may  notice  to  my  Welsh  readers  with  as  much  pomp  as  if  we  had 
been  in  view  of  the  head  of  the  Nile  or  the  Niger.  It  rises  close  to  the  sea  shore,  on  the 
northern  side  of  the  estuary,  and  from  thence  extends,,  with  an  irregular  ascent,  first 
northwards  for  about  three  miles,  and  then  ENE  for  ten  miles  further,  giving  out  from 
its  summit  a  branch  nearly  three  miles  long  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  parallel  to  the 
main  ridge.  It  is  very  steep  and  craggy  on  every  side,  but  particularly  on  the  south, 
which  is  nearly  perpendicular*.  The  summit  of  this  mountain,  in  height  the  second  in 
all  Wales,  is  said  to  be  nine  hundred  and  fifty  yards  above  the  green,  near  Dolgelle, 
which  is  situated  at  its  base  on  the  north  side  •]-. 

A  little  to  the  northward  of  the  Disynwy  is  Sarn  y  Bwch,  a  dangerous  shoal,  which 
I  have  before  mentioned,  and  over  which  we  felt  our  way  by  means  of  the  long  pole 
which  had  been  our  pilot  over  Sarn  Cynfelyn.  The  keel  of  the  boat  grazed  the  bottom 

•  Aikin's  Tour  through  North  Wales.  -j-  Pennant. 

once 


VOVAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  153 

once  or  twice,  but  without  injury,  and  the  helmsman  declared,  that  any  pilot  might  run 
his  vessel  aground,  but  that,  '  to  touch  and  go,'  was  the  highest  perfection  of  his  art.  Be- 
tween this  shoal  and  Barmouth  the  sea  has  left  no  vestiges  of  the  Lowland  Hundred, 
and  is  again  bounded  by  rocks.  After  advancing  for  a  few  miles  we  entered  Barmouth 
Bay,  and  in  half  an  hour  were  opposite  to  the  estuary  of  the  river  Maw,  or  Mawddach, 
and  were  calculating  upon  speedily  arriving  at  our  port,  when  a  sudden  squall  of  wind 
quite  changed  the  face  of  affairs,  and  in  a  short  time  drove  us  more  than  a  mile  to  sea. 
We  made  several  attempts  under  two,  three,  and  four  reefs,  to  face  the  storm;  but 
with  all  our  efforts  and  precautions,  our  motion  continued  to  be  retrograde,  and  we  had 
just  determined,  in  despair,  to  cast  anchor,  when  the  wind  suddenly  died  away,  and 
so  completely,  that  we  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  oars,  in  order  to  reach  the 
point  from  whence  we  had  just  been  so  rapidly  hurried  away.  These  violent  changes 
are  very  common  in  the  vicinity  of  mountains,  and  are  exceedingly  dangerous  to  vessels 
whose  sails  are  not  so  readily  managed  as  those  of  our  small  boat.  After  a  few  other 
minor  difficulties  in  tracing  our  passage  through  the  mazes  of  the  sand  banks  which 
obstruct  the  entrance  to  the  harbour,  we  landed  at  Barmouth. 

The  original  Welsh  name  of  this  place  is  Aber  Maw,  of  which  Mr.  Bingley  supposes 
its  present  title  is  a  corruption,  of  gradual  growth ;  first  Bermaw,  for  the  sake  of  abbre- 
viation, and  then  Barmouth,  for  the  sake  of  I  don't  know  what.  Mr.  Pennant  says,  that  the 
town  is  seated  very  near  to  the  sea,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Maw,  and  takes  its  name  of  Bar- 
mouth,  i.  e.  Aber  Maw,  from  that  circumstance.  I  rather  suspect,  however,  that  Bar- 
mouth  can  claim  no  relationship  to  the  Welsh  Aber  Maw,  and  that  it  is  a  downright 
Anglicism,  referring  to  the  bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  haven  ;  though  it  may  be  urged  that 
this  distinction  was  not  likely  to  be  applied  to  any  particular  harbour  in  Cardigan  Bay, 
in  which  there  is  not  one  without  a  bar.  It  may  possibly  be  a  corruption  of  Aber  Maw ; 
but  it  cannot,  according  to  Pennant,  be  made  synonymous  with  it  by  any  ingenuity  of 
translation.  The  English  '  Mouth'  has  the  same  meaning  as  the  Welsh  '  Aber ;'  but  the  Bar 
and  the  Maw  are  quite  irreconcileable.  But  I  beg  the  reader's  pardon  for  blundering 
upon  this  unimportant  question :  the  place  is  encompassed  by  many  shoals  not  easily 
escaped;  but  this  is  certainly  running  foul  of  ground  which  was  not  in  my  way. 

The  Maw,  for  a  considerable  distance  from  its  mouth,  is  a  fine  broad  river  at  high 
water ;  but  when  the  tide  retires,  more  than  two-thirds  of  its  bed  are  left  dry.  It  is  navi- 
gable for  boats  and  barges  as  high  up  as  Dolgelle.  From  its  north  bank  we  had  a  finer 
view  of  Cader  Idris  than  we  had  had  from  any  other  station.  A  high  steep  cliff,  which 
bounds  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  conceals  its  lower  parts,  and  the  huge  summit  ap- 
pears immediately  behind  it,  as  if  the  mountain  rose  from  the  plain  in  one  vast  precipice. 
It  seemed  so  near,  that,  calculating  its  distance  from  the  spot  where  I  stood  by  the  eye, 
I  should  not  have  conceived  it  to  be  more  than  two  miles,  though  it  was  really  seven.  A 
vast  mass  of  the  mountain  was  disclosed,  and  I  could  plainly  distinguish  that  it  was  all 

x  2  of 


154  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  naked  rock,  and  almost  perpendicular.  The  scenery  higher  up  the  Maw  is  very  beau- 
tiful :  the  river  is  deep,  clear,  and  smooth,  and  the  banks  on  each  side  are  bold  and 
rocky,  and  diversified  by  small  bays  and  promontories,  but  wanting  a  more  frequent  and 
a  richer  covering  of  wood. 

The  town  of  Barmouth  is  the  most  singular  in  point  of  situation  of  any  that  I  have 
ever  seen,  and  if  it  has  any  interest  in  the  eyes  of  a  traveller,  must  certainly  derive  it  all 
from  its  whimsical  inversion  of  every  rule  of  comfort  and  convenience.  It  consists  of 
four  or  five  tiers  of  houses,  ranged  like  the  benches  of  a  theatre  on  the  side  of  a  rocky 
hill,  the  chimneys  of  each  tier  being  precisely  on  the  same  level  with  the  doors  of  the  tier 
above  it.  I  need  scarcely  mention  the  annoyances  resulting  from  this  mode  of  building 
in  the  affair  of  smoke,  and  a  few  words  will  suffice  for  the  cornmodiousness  of  the  craggy 
steps  leading  up  the  precipices,  and  also  for  the  state  of  that  narrow  path  before  each 
tier  of  houses,  from  which  the  accumulated  filth  has  no  means  of  escaping,  unless  it  were 
carried  away  by  the  inhabitants,  a  thing  scarcely  to  be  expected. 

The  houses  of  the  lowest  range,  which  stand  quite  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  are  the 
most  respectable  in  appearance,  and  are  generally  let  as  lodgings  to  strangers  who  visit 
Barmouth  as  a  bathing  place.  They  are,  of  course,  exempt  from  many  of  the  evils  which 
attach  to  their  more  airy  neighbours ;  but  their  advantages  are  more  than  overbalanced 
by  a  high  bank  of  sand  before  them,  which  not  only  intercepts  their  view  of  the  sea, 
but  sprightlily  introduces  itself  with  the  west  wind  into  every  pervious  cranny  from  the 
garrets  to  the  ground.  One  cannot  account  for  the  strange  indolence  or  ignorance  of  the 
inhabitants,  in  not  attempting  to  consolidate  these  sands  by  vegetation,  though,  when  the 
Avind  blows  strongly  from  the  west,  they  actually  render  the  lower  houses  scarcely  ha- 
bitable. A  subscription  paper  was  put  into  our  hands  soon  after  our  arrival,  requesting 
our  mite  for  the  construction  of  a  road,  there  being  none  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
place  which  was  not  knee-deep  in  sand,  except  the  pathways  on  the  hill,  which  were 
almost  knee-deep  in  matter  still  more  offensive.  There  is  not  a  spot  of  verdure,  and 
scarcely  of  vegetable  earth,  within  sight  of  the  town :  all  in  front  of  it  that  is  land  is  a 
desert,  and  the  hill  on  which  it  is  built,  and  which  rises  to  a  great  height  above  it,  is  a 
barren  rock ;  in  short,  it  is  in  all  its  combinations  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  every  thing  that 
is  cheerless  and  uncomfortable. 

It  is  singular  that  such  a  place  should  be  frequented  by  visitors  who  are  not  driven  to 
it  by  positive  necessity,  but  who  have  the  world  before  them,  where  to  choose.  The  sick, 
indeed,  may  overlook  all  considerations  in  the  pursuit  and  the  anticipation  of  health ;  but 
the  sick  do  not  compose  a  twentieth  part  of  the  society  at  watering  places.  They  are 
the  common  refuge  of  the  idle,  when  the  season  for  doing  nothing  is  over  elsewhere,  and  of 
the  busy  when  they  have  nothing  to  do.  Every  principle  of  their  constitution  denies  that 
they  should  afford  any  lively  matter  for  description;  and  though  it  may  appear,  on  a 
superficial  view,  that  a  spot  might  have  been  selected  less  deplorably  blaaK  tiian  liur- 


Barmouth,  Merionethshire 


View  of  Caernarvon  Castle,  from  Anglesea 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  155 

mouth ;  yet  I  know  not,  on  recollection,  that  the  leaden  sceptre  of  Ennui  is  more  despotic 
there  than  in  much  fairer  parts  of  the  creation,  where  people  assemble  only  to  vegetate 
and  get  fat.  I  have  i>een  at  many  watering  places  in  various  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and 
must  confess  that  I  have  observed  in  them  all  a  most  harmonious  consent  of  dulness  and 
insipidity.  My  impressions  on  this  subject  have  been  particularly  fixed  by  the  circulating 
library  in  that  dreary  interval  between  breakfast  and  dinner,  and  by  the  dress-walk  in  the 
evening.  The  habitually  idle  may  loiter  through  their  time  at  these  places  without  re- 
pining ;  but  those  who  retire  to  them  from  active  employment,  often  find,  that  with  their 
business  they  have  thrown  by  all  interest  in  life,  which  neither  the  raffle,  nor  the  donkey- 
race,  nor  all  the  desperate  resources  of  the  scene  and  the  season  can  supply.  I  have  often 
beheld  with  extreme  pity  a  melancholy  outcast  picking  up  pebbles,  and  throwing  them 
down  again,  with  an  eagerness  as  though  the  business  were  really  profitable,  till,  having 
exhausted  to  the  very  dregs  all  interest  in  this  heavy  amusement,  he  has  sat  down  in 
utter  helplessness,  and  surely  to  lament  that  he  ever  was  born.  But  let  me  hasten  from 
this  petrifying  topic. 

Some  coasting  vessels  belong  to  the  port  of  Barmouth ;  but,  from  the  state  of  the 
harbour,  they  are  necessarily  very  small.  The  imports  are  coals,  groceries,  and  other 
articles  of  common  use  for  the  town  and  neighbourhood ;  the  only  exports  of  any  conse- 
quence are  woollen  goods,  and  these  are  shipped  in  small  quantities.  An  attempt  was 
made  some  years  ago  to  establish  a  warehouse  at  this  place,  and  raise  the  port  into 
consequence  by  making  it  a  grand  dep6t  of  woollen  goods  intended  for  exportation  ;  but 
the  plan  failed  in  consequence  of  the  pernicious  activity  of  numerous  petty  factors, 
through  whose  hands  the  greater  part  of  woollen  goods  manufactured  in  Wales  find  a 
vent. 

These  jobbers,  or  forestallers,  for  such  they  are  reputed,  travel  about  the  country  to 
the  different  villages  and  cottages,  and  buy  all  the  flannels  and  other  articles  of  woollen 
that  they  can  lay  their  hands  on,  much  to  the  disparagement,  it  is  said,  of  the  general 
interests  of  the  trade.  The  woollen  manufactures  are  of  such  weighty  consideration,  in  a 
view  of  Wales,  that  it  may  appear  inexcusable  to  travel  through  the  country  without 
giving  some  account  of  their  present  state  and  extent;  but  the  confused  manner  in  which 
the  concerns  are  conducted  between  the  merchants  and  the  manufacturers,  the  want  of 
accurate  public  accounts,  and  the  scarcity  of  factories  and  regular  markets,  render  it  im- 
possible to  ascertain  those  general  facts,  which  are  necessary  to  the  forming  of  anv  con- 
clusions as  to  the  real  magnitude  and  importance  of  the  business.  It  is  true,  that  there 
are  many  interesting  particulars  relating  to  the  manufactures  which  might  have  been 
granted  to  my  enquiries ;  but  in  these  1  have  been  anticipated  by  Mr.  Aikin,  who  has 
published  a  short,  but  clear  and  satisfactory,  account  of  them,  from  the  communications 
of  a  friend  personally  acquainted  with  the  subject*. 

*  Journal  of  a  Tour  through  North  Wales,  8cc.  p.  69. 

As 


156  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

As  it  is  the  only  thing  in  the  place  which  I  can  in  honesty  speak  favourably  of,  I 
ought  not  to  have  forgotten  to  state,  that  there  is  a  very  decent  inn  at  Barmouth,  com- 
fortable in  all  its  departments,  except  that  when  the  wind  is  westerly,  every  thing  which 
one  touches  and  tastes  in  it  is  gritty,  and  this  is  more  the  misfortune  than  the  fault  of  the 
proprietor.  We  were  entertained  here,  during  our  meals,  by  a  harper,  the  first  whom  we 
had  met  with  in  Wales ;  he  was  but  a  very  indifferent  performer ;  but  as  good,  I  think,  as 
several  others,  whom  we  afterwards  heard  in  other  places.  They  were  all  blind,  and  their 
misfortunes  moved  our  charity  far  more  forcibly  than  their  music,  which  indeed  disap- 
pointed us  very  much ;  for  our  expectations  had  been  raised  by  report,  and  by  that  feeling 
of  interest  which  naturally  springs  from  the  thought  of  the  harp  in  Wales.  The  influence 
of  association  gives  a  dignity  to  the  name  of  a  blind  harper  which  is  denied  to  that  of  u 
blind  fiddler,  and  presents  him  to  the  imagination  under  a  form  altogether  distinct  from 
that  which  commonly  belongs  to  the  latter  professor ;  but  I  must  acknowledge,  that  one 
tune  from  the  minstrel  of  Barmouth,  and  one  peep  at  his  person,  convinced  me  most 
thoroughly  of  the  injustice  of  these  distinctions.  None  of  the  harpers  sing,  at  least  none 
of  them  did  whom  I  heard,  nor  were  any  of  them  acquainted  with  a  single  tradition  of 
their  art  that  was  more  ancient  than  themselves  :  they  sat  in  the  hall  like  their  progeni- 
tors of  old,  and  while  I  was  thinking  of  Lhewelyn,  accompanied  my  dreams  with  country 
dances.  To  be  sure,  it  is  not  at  all  wonderful,  that  a  poor  man,  unhappily  blind,  should 
learn  to  play  a  tune  or  two  upon  the  harp,  as  a  recommendation  to  charity,  without 
knowing  any  thing  of  the  ancient  bards,  and  I  should  not  have  said  so  much  on  the 
subject,  had  I  not  been  deceived  into  extravagant  expectations  by  the  sentimentality  of 
several  tourists,  who  have  bestowed  far  more  praise  on  the  present  race  of  Welsh  harpers 
than  they  deserve. 

We  hired  a  boat  at  Barmouth,  to  take  us  to  Pwllheli,  a  long  stretch  of  thirty  miles, 
which  a  friendly  intimation  that  we  had  received,  as  to  the  wretched  state  of  all  accommo- 
dations by  the  way,  made  us  anxious  to  accomplish  in  one  day.  There  was  nothing  in 
the  immediate  scenery  of  the  coast  that  rendered  a  more  protracted  passage  desirable : 
the  Merionethshire  coast,  from  Barmouth  to  its  northern  extremity,  is  extended,  with 
little  variation,  in  a  sandy  flat,  which  is  continued  also  for  several  miles  beyond  Pwllheli 
along  the  coast  of  Carnarvonshire.  When  we  had  advanced  about  two  miles,  Sarn  Badrig 
was  discovered  to  us  by  a  long  line  of  breakers,  and  we  soon  heard  their  terrible  roar. 
The  shoal  lies  nearly  five  miles  to  the  northward  of  Barmouth :  a  considerable  part  of  it 
was  dry ;  but  there  was  water  sufficient  for  our  boat  between  its  east  end  and  the 
shore.  Mr.  Bingley  observes,  in  an  excursion  to  this  part  of  the  coast,  that  his  guide 
pointed  out  to  him  part  of  a  long  stone  wall,  which  runs  out  into  the  sea,  in  a  west-south- 
west direction  for  nearly  twenty  miles,  and  is  called  Sarn  Badrig.  He  further  remarks, 
that  it  is  a  wonderful  work,  being  throughout  about  twenty-four  feet  in  thickness;  that 
Sarn  y  Bwch  is  supposed  to  meet  the  end  of  it;  and,  finally,  that  both  these  walls  were 

formerly 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  157 

formerly  built  to  keep  out  the  sea*.  I  know  not  how  this  gentleman  could  have  seen 
any  part  of  Sarn  Badrig,  and  have  mistaken  it  for  a  wall,  nor  by  what  mode  of  admea- 
surement he  discovered  it  to  be  about  twenty-four  feet  in  thickness.  I  saw  it  nearly  at 
low  water,  and  it  appeared  very  evidently  to  be  a  bank  of  pebbles,  several  hundred  yards 
in  width.  As  it  is  laid  down  in  the  charts  it  is  six  leagues  in  length,  and  varies  from  a 
mile  to  half  a  mile  in  breadth  for  an  extent  of  about  five  leagues,  where  it  suddenly 
spreads  out  more  than  half  a  mile  on  each  side,  and  continues  nearly  of  an  equal  breadth 
to  its  western  extremity.  Sarn  y  Bwch  is  full  nine  miles  distant  from  any  part  of  it :  if 
these  shoals  joined  at  their  extremities,  they  would  effectually  exclude  all  vessels  from  the 
space  which  they  enclosed,  except  at  high  water;  the  largest  class  of  vessels,  however, 
that  navigate  Cardigan  Bay,  pass  between  them  at  all  hours  of  the  tide. 

I  have  premised  that  there  was  little  to  divert  our  attention  in  the  scenery  of  the 
coast  during  our  voyage  of  this  day ;  but  nothing  could  be  more  various  and  magni- 
ficent than  our  views  of  the -inland  country.  The  mountains  of  Carnarvonshire  were 
drawn  out  in  a  long  range  before  us,  and  as  we  advanced,  they  opened  upon  us  with  still 
increasing  majesty.  The  most  southern  mountains  of  the  range  rise  so  near  to  the  shore, 
that  we  could  distinguish  all  the  forms  and  colours  of  their  rocky  sides,  and  behind  them 
was  a  sublime  confusion  of  mountains  beyond  mountains,  with  the  great  peak  of  Snow- 
don  above  them  all,  and  still  the  most  distant  object.  We  were  much  struck  with  the 
first  sight  of  Harlech  castle,  which  was  suddenly  discovered  to  us  on  rounding  a  point  of 
land.  It  is  rendered  a  very  conspicuous  object  by  the  boldness  of  its  situation,  being  built 
on  the  summit  of  a  high  projecting  rock,  which  stands  quite  a  solitary  eminence  on  the 
coast,  with  a  vast  expanse  of  sea  in  front,  and  backed  at  a  short  distance  by  the  moun- 
tains. The  castle  forms  a  grand  mass  of  building,  and  is  so  far  preserved,  that  we  ap- 
proached very  near  to  it  before  we  could  perceive  that  it  was  in  any  degree  a  ruin.  We 
landed  that  we  might  examine  it  more  minutely,  though  it  is  seen  from  no  where  to  so 
much  advantage  as  from  the  sea.  It  is  a  square  building,  with  a  round  tower  at  each 
corner  and  one  on  each  side  of  the  entrance.  A  circular  turret  formerly  issued  from  the 
top  of  each  of  the  large  rounders ;  but  they  are  now  all  in  ruins.  The  windows  and  all  the 
arches  are  pointed,  and  the  architecture  of  the  whole  building  is  far  more  costly  and  ele- 
gant than  that  of  any  of  the  numerous  castles  which  we  had  hitherto  seen  in  Wales.  It  is 
protected  on  the  east  or  land  side  by  an  immense  foss  cut  in  the  solid  rock ;  on  every  other 
side  the  natural  height  and  abruptness  of  the  rock  were  considered  a  sufficient  defence. 

The  present  castle  was  founded  by  Edward  the  First;  but  the  rock  on  which  it 
stands  was  fortified  at  a  much  earlier  period.  The  first  name  by  which  it  was  known,  or 
the  first  on  record,  was  Twr  Bronwen,  from  Bronwen,  or  the  White-necked,  sister  to  Bran 
ap  Llyr,  King  of  Britain.  It  afterwards  assumed  the  title  of  Caer  Collwyn,  from  Collwyn 

*  Bingley's  North  Wales,  p.  326. 

ap 


158  VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

ap  Tangno,  one  of  the  fifteen  tribes  of  North  Wales,  who  resided  for  some  time  in  a  square 
tower  of  the  ancient  fortress,  the  remains  of  which,  Mr.  Pennant  states  *,  are  very  apparent, 
as  are  also  those  of  the  old  walls,  on  which  the  more  modern  are,  in  certain  places,  seen 
to  rest ;  and  if  this  be  the  case,  we  may  venture  to  say,  that  they  are  the  only  morsels  of 
Welsh  masonry  of  such  a  date  and  of  such  construction  that  are  now  in  being.     Twr,  or 
Tower,  has  a  consequence  in  its  very  sound,  that  seems  to  discountenance  some  opinions 
which  I  have  formerly  expressed,  as  to  the  state  of  architecture  among  the  Welsh,  even  in 
a  much  later  age  than  the  reign  of  Bran  ap  Llyr;  but  the  rudest  possible  forms  of  British 
fortification  on  the  tops  of  hills  and  promontories  are  very  frequently  distinguished  by  the 
same  imposing  title.     Mr.  Pennant  himself  thus  describes  the  remains  of  Llys  Brad  wen, 
the  court  or  palace  of  Ednowen,  chief  of  one  of  the  fifteen  tribes  of  North  Wales,  about 
the  reign  of  Gruffyth  ap  Conan,  who  was  contemporary  with  William  the  Conqueror, 
William  Rufus,  and  Henry  the  First.     "  The  reliques  are  about  thirty  yards  square  :  the 
entrance  about  seven  feet  wide,  with  a  large  upright  stone  on  each  side,  by  way  of  door- 
case :  the  walls  formed  with  large  stones,  uncemented  by  any  mortar :  in  short,  the  struc- 
ture of  this  palace  shews  the  very  low  state  of  architecture  in  those  times  :  it  may  be 
paralleled  only  by  the  artless  fabrick  of  a  cattle  house-f."   Yet  after  this  concession,  and  a 
caution  too,  to  the  reader,  that  he  shtfuld  not  imagine  every  palace  in  Wales  to  have  been 
of  equal  magnificence  with  that  of  Ednowen,  this  author,  and  many  others  after  him,  who 
have  travelled  over  the  same  ground,  frequently  refer  the  foundation  of  buildings,  finished 
with  the  nicest  art,  to  the  days  of  Bran  ap  Llyr,  or  other  unheard-of  names  in  the  darkest 
periods  of  British  history.     Giraldus  Cambrensis,  in  his  tour  through  Wales,  passed  close 
by  Harlech,  but  he  makes  no  mention  of  the  castle ;  and  we  may  fairly  infer  from  his 
silence,  that  there  was  at  that  time  no  castle  to  describe,  at  least  none  of  consequence 
enough  to  court  description. 

In  whatever  manner  the  place  was  fortified,  history,  though  she  had  little  else  to 
attend  to  in  this  country  but  the  rise  and  fall  of  castles,  does  not  point  to  it  as  the  scene 
of  any  military  transactions  before  the  erection  of  the  present  fortress  by  Edward  the  First. 
Margaret  of  Anjou,  when  she  received  the  news  of  the  unfortunate  battle  of  Northamp- 
ton, is  said  to  have  fled  from  Coventry  to  Harlech,  where  she  found  shelter  for  a  short 
time  previous  to  her  retreat  into  Scotland.  In  her  flight  she  narrowly  escaped  being 
taken  by  the  Lord  Stanley,  who  was  so  near  her  that  he  captured  all  her  jewels,  treasure, 
and  baggage.  On  the  accession  of  Edward  the  Fourth,  the  castle  was  held  by  Dafydd 
ap  Jevan  ap  Eineon,  a  staunch  friend  to  the  house  of  Lancaster,  and  who  refused  to 
deliver  up  his  trust  even  in  the  last  extremity  of  their  declining  fortune.  He  was  be- 
sieged here  in  the  year  1468,  by  William  Herbert,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  who  invested  the 
place,  after  a  laborious  and  dangerous  march  over  the  most  rugged  tract  of  the  moun- 

*  Tour  in  Wales,  Vol.  II.  p.  283.  f  Ib'd-  Vol.  II.  p.  241. 

tains, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  159 

tains,  which  had  never  before  been  passed  by  a  foreign  force,  and  had  always  been 
regarded  as  the  last  secure  retreat  of  the  natives  from  the  power  of  invasion.  The  earl 
entrusted  the  immediate  conduct  of  the  siege  to  his  brother,  Sir  Richard  Herbert,  who, 
before  he  proceeded  to  offensive  operations,  sent  a  summons  of  surrender,  to  which  the 
gallant  Dafydd,  bold  in  the  conviction  that  the  fortress  was  impregnable,  is  said  to  have 
replied,  That  he  had  defended  a  castle  in  France  so  long,  that  he  had  made  all  the  old 
women  in  Wales  talk  of  him ;  and  that  he  would  keep  this  so  long,  that  all  the  old  women 
in  France  should  talk  of  him.  I  do  not  find  that  the  particulars  of  the  siege  are  recorded; 
but  Dafydd  finally  surrendered,  and  it  is  conjectured  that  he  was  forced  into  submission 
by  famine.  Sir  Richard  engaged  to  save  his  life ;  but  Edward  refused  to  listen  to  his 
intercession,  till  Sir  Richard  enforced  his  consent  by  declaring,  that  his  Majesty  might, 
if  he  pleased,  take  his  life  instead  of  that  of  the  Welsh  captain ;  but  that  if  this  could  not 
be  agreed  to,  he  would  most  assuredly  replace  Dafydd  in  his  castle,  and  his  Majesty 
might  send  whom  he  pleased  to  take  him  out  again*. 

During  the  last  civil  wars,  Harlech  was  alternately  in  the  hands  of  both  parties,  and 
was  finally  taken  by  the  forces  of  the  parliament,  under  General  Mytton,  in  March,  1647, 
when  William  Owen  was  governor,  and  the  whole  garrison  consisted  of  only  twenty-eight 
men.  With  this  small  force  the  castle  had  still  the  honour  of  surrendering  on  articles, 
and  was  the  last  in  North  Wales  that  held  out  in  the  cause  of  the  king. 

The  town  of  Harlech,  though  a  borough  town,  is  a  miserable  hole,  consisting  of  a 
few  ragged  and  dirty  huts,  which  did  not  detain  us  for  a  moment. 

\Ve  were  now  nearly  in  the  northern  corner  of  Cardigan  Bay,  so  enclosed  by  land, 
that  the  sea  had  the  appearance  of  a  lake ;  and  though  its  borders  were  tame  and  bald,  it 
was  girt  at  a  short  distance  by  a  semicircle  of  magnificent  mountains,  which  rendered  it 
pre-eminent  in  all  the  grander  features  of  lake-scenery.  We  proceeded  in  a  direct  line 
from  Harlech  to  Crickaeth  castle,  wind  and  tide  obliging  us  to  cut  oft"  the  angle  of  the  bay. 
We  regretted  this  necessity,  as  it  had  been  our  particular  wish  to  have  landed  at  the 
Traeth  Bach,  and  the  Traeth  Mawr,  the  Little  Sand,  and  the  Large  Sand,  in  the  latter  of 
which  an  immense  tract  of  land  has  within  these  few  years  been  recovered  from  the  sea. 
We  observed  the  opening  in  the  land  which  forms  the  common  mouth  of  these  inlets,  and 
at  high  water  receives  the  tide,  but  which,  when  we  saw  it,  was  a  waste  of  sand.  This 
sand  is  nearly  three  miles  in  breadth,  and  extends  for  more  than  a  mile  in  a  northerly 
direction,  when  it  is  divided  into  two  branches  by  a  tongue  of  land,  which,  being  rocky 
and  mountainous,  has  resisted  the  depreciations  committed  by  the  sea  upon  the  defenceless 
flat  on  each  side  of  it.  Traeth  Bach,  the  western  branch,  is  about  four  miles  long,  and,  at 
its  southern  extremity,  a  mile  broad,  becoming  gradually  narrower  northwards,  till  it 
opens  into  the  vale  of  Festiniog,  a  tract  of  small  extent,  but  remarkable  fertility,  and 
celebrated  for  the  exquisite  beauties  of  its  scenery.  A  multitude  of  streams  rush  down 

*  Life  of  Lord  Herbert. 

Y  the 


160  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

the  sides  of  the  mountains  that  enclose  it,  and  unite  in  the  river  Dwyryd,  which  winds 
through  the  valley,  and  discharges  itself  into  the  Traeth.  Lord  Lyttleton  has  observed 
of  the  vale  of  Festiniog,  that,  *  with  the  woman  one  loves,  with  the  friend  of  one's  heart, 
and  a  good  library  of  books/  (additions  indeed  which  make  place  a  matter  of  very  little 
importance,)  '  one  might  pass  an  age  there  and  think  it  but  a  day.' 

Traeth  Mawr  has  assumed  so  completely  a  new  face,  that  it  requires  a  new  name, 
though  the  old  one  serves  as  a  memorial  of  what  it  was,  and  of  the  skill,  spirit,  and  perse- 
verance of  the  individual,  who  has  made  it  what  it  is.  The  space  formerly  covered  by  the 
sea  every  tide  was  about  five  miles  in  length,  and  varied  from  one  mile  to  two  miles  in 
breadth  :  it  terminated  to  the  north  in  a  well-cultivated  valley,  with  which,  in  the  course 
of  a  few  years,  it  will  be  blended  in  one  tract  of  equal  fertility.  Sir  John  Wynn,  of 
Gwedir,  in  the  year  1625,  first  conceived  the  design  of  gaining  both  the  Traeth  Mawr  and 
the  Traeth  Bach  from  the  sea  by  embankments,  and  proposed  its  execution  to  his  coun- 
tryman, Sir  Hugh  Middleton,  who  had  acquired  a  high  reputation  for  skill  in  works  of 
this  kind,  by  the  recovery  of  two  thousand  acres  of  land  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  In  a  letter 
to  his  friend,  he  declares,  after  describing  the  situation  and  extent  of  the  sands,  the 
facility  of  procuring  wood  and  other  materials  in  the  neighbourhood  for  the  construction 
of  mounds,  and  his  earnest  desire  "  to  further  his  country  in  such  actions  as  might  be  for 
their  profit,  and  leave  a  remembrance  of  his  endeavours,"  that  "  he  is  content  to  adventure 
a  brace  of  hundred  pounds  to  join  with  him  in  the  work*."  Making  proper  allowances  for 
the  superior  value  of  money  at  the  time,  this  venturesome  offer  still  appears  out  of  all 
bounds  disproportioned  to  the  undertaking,  and  so  it  appeared  to  Sir  Hugh,  whose  reply, 
while  it  rejects  the  proposal  of  his  friend,  gives  so  characteristic  a  sketch  of  his  own 
indefatigable  activity,  that  I  venture  to  set  it  down  in  his  own  words.  It  is  as  follows : 

HONOURABLE  SIR, 

I  have  received  your  kind  letter.  Few  are  the  things  done  by  me,  for  which  I  give 
God  the  glory.  It  may  please  you  to  understand  my  first  undertaking  of  publick  works 
was  amongst  my  owne,  within  less  than  a  myle  of  the  place  where  I  hadd  my  first  beinge, 
24  or  25  years  since,  in  seekinge  of  coales  for  the  town  of  Denbigh.  Touching  the  drowned 
lands  near  your  lyvinge,  there  are  manye  things  considerable  therein.  Iff  to  be  gayned, 
which  will  hardlie  be  performed  without  great  stones,  which  was  plentiful!  at  the  Wight, 
as  well  as  wood ;  and  great  sums  of  money  to  be  spent,  not  hundreds  but  thousands — 
and  first  of  all  his  Majesty's  interest  must  be  got.  As  for  myself  I  am  grown  into  years 
and  full  of  busines  here  at  the  mynes,  the  river  at  London,  and  other  places — my  weeklie 
charge  being  above  200/. ;  which  maketh  me  verie  unwilling  to  undertake  anie  other 
worke ;  and  the  least  of  theis,  whether  the  drowned  lands  or  mynes,  requireth  a  whole 

*   Harrington's  Miscellanies :  History  of  the  Gwedir  Family. 

man, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  l6l 

man,  with  a  large  purse.  Noble  sir,  my  desire  is  great  to  see  you,  which  should  draw  me 
a  farr  longer  waie  ;  yet  such  are  my  occasions  at  this  tyme  here,  for  the  settlinge  of  this 
great  worke,  that  I  can  hardlie  be  spared  one  houre  in  a  daie.  My  wieff  being  also  here, 
I  cannot  leave  her  in  a  strange  place.  Yet  my  love  to  publique  works,  and  desire  to  see 
you  (if  God  permit)  maie  another  tyme  drawe  me  into  those  parts.  Soe  with  my  heartie 
comendations  I  comit  you  and  all  your  good  desires  to  God, 

Lodge,  Your  assured  loving  Couzin  to  command, 

Sept.  3d,  1625.  HUGH  MYDDLETON*. 

This  explanation  probably  quite  confounded  Sir  John ;  for  he  did  not  renew  his 
proposal  under  any  new  form ;  nor  did  the  Traeth  Mawr  excite  the  interest  and  ambition 
of  any  other  adventurer  till  about  eighteen  years  ago,  when  William  Madocks,  Esq.  be- 
came engaged  in  the  great  work  of  reclaiming  it,  and,  by  a  course  of  active  and  well- 
directed  exertion,  speedily  secured  his  reward.  This  gentleman  by  his  first  labours  reco- 
vered nineteen  hundred  acres  of  land  near  the  northern  extremity  of  the  estuary,  which 
are  now  in  excellent  cultivation,  and  indeed  have  for  some  years  produced  regular  and 
abundant  crops  of  wheat,  barley,  clover,  &c.  A  new  town  was  built  on  part  of  the 
redeemed  ground,  and  called,  in  honour  of  its  founder,  Tremadoc.  This  successful  con- 
quest gave  encouragement  to  more  extended  designs,  and  in  the  year  1807,  Mr.  Madocks 
obtained  a  grant  from  the  crown,  confirmed  by  act  of  parliament,  of  all  the  sands  of  the 
Traeth  Mawr,  between  Pont  Aberglaslyn  and  the  point  of  G£st.  To  secure  this  tract, 
consisting  of  about  three  thousand  five  hundred  acres,  a  vast  embankment  was  thrown 
up,  thirty  feet  wide  at  the  top  and  a  hundred  feet  at  its  base,  and  extending  from  the 
shore  of  Carnarvonshire  to  the  south-western  point  of  the  neck  of  land  which  divides  the 
Traeth  Mawr  and  the  Traeth  Bach,  a  distance  of  about  sixteen  hundred  yards.  The 
embankment  was  composed  of  earth  and  stones,  brought  from  the  land  at  each  extremity 
in  small  waggons  running  on  iron  rail-roads,  the  work  being  carried  out  in  a  line  frorn  each 
shore  till  the  points  met.  It  was  soon  discovered  that  the  stones  either  sunk  into  the 
sand  or  were  dispersed  by  the  action  of  the  tides,  and  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  pre- 
pare a  foundation.  For  this  purpose  a  strong  and  thick  kind  of  matting  was  employed, 
made  of  rushes,  which  were  procured  in  abundance  from  the  adjacent  marshes :  the 
matting  was  secured  by  stakes  driven  into  the  sands,  and  was  found  completely  to 
answer  the  end  for  which  it  was  used.  The  river  Glaslyn,  which  flows  through  the 
Traeth  Mawr,  and  brings  down  a  large  body  of  water  from  the  mountains,  is  now  dis- 
charged into  the  sea  through  five  floodgates,  each  fifteen  feet  in  height.  The  whole  of  this 
vast  work  was  completed  in  about  four  years,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it 
will  be  effectual  and  permanent.  The  longer  it  stands  the  less  likely  it  becomes  to  give 

*  History  of  the  Gwedir  Family. 

Y  2  way ; 


162  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

way ;  for  the  sea  keeps  gradually  forcing  up  a  bank  of  sand  before  it,  and  if  not  over- 
whelmed by  some  extraordinarily  high  tide,  before  this  advanced  \vork  is  of  sufficient  mag- 
nitude to  repel  the  invasion,  it  may  endure  for  ages. 

Traeth  Mawr  bounds  the  coast  of  Merionethshire,  from  which  the  coast  of  Carnarvon- 
shire projects  at  right  angles.  The  western  division  of  this  county,  called  the  Promontory 
of  Llyn,  stretches  out  in  a  long,  narrow  peninsula,  regularly  tapering  to  a  point  like  the 
county  of  Cornwall.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  explain  that,  standing  thus  exposed  on 
three  sides  to  the  ocean,  it  is  utterly  destitute  of  all  the  graces  of  sylvan  scenery.  The 
Snowdonian  mountains  occupy  the  eastern  part  in  an  unbroken  range,  nearly  from  sea  to 
sea ;  but  as  they  extend  to  the  westward  the  chain  becomes  discontinued,  and  they  rise  at 
considerable  intervals  from  each  other,  gradually  declining  in  height  till  they  terminate 
at  the  western  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  in  a  tremendous  precipice,  called  Braich  y 
Pwll  Head. 

Crickaeth  castle  is  about  three  miles  to  the  westward  of  the  mouth  of  Traeth  Mawr, 
and  stands  on  a  high  cliff  jutting  out  far  into  the  sea,  and,  like  the  rock  of  Ilarlech,  with 
a  long  flat  on  each  side  of  it.  Both  these  fortresses  were  of  great  importance  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  passes  through  the  Traeths,  and  it  is  a  curious  circumstance,  that  two 
eminences  should  have  been  found  so  nicely  fitted  for  military  posts,  one  at  each  side  of 
the  estuary,  and  on  a  coast  which,  with  these  exceptions,  is  uniformly  flat.  Both  the 
castles  may  be  seen  in  one  view  from  many  different  points,  and  their  high  embattled 
towers  give  great  character  to  the  wild  magnificence  of  the  surrounding  scenerj\  The 
castle  of  Crickaeth  is  not  a  building  of  such  magnitude  as  that  of  Harlech,  and  is  in  a 
much  more  ruinous  condition.  There  is  nothing  in  its  remains  that  is  worthy  of  minute 
notice ;  but  the  whole  constitutes  a  very  picturesque  ruin.  I  observed  that  the  towers 
are  all  square,  except  two  round  towers  which  guard  the  entrance,  and  these  are  square 
in  the  inside,  and  are  supposed  to  have  been  cased  since  their  first  foundation.  The  castle 
is  said  to  have  been  repaired  by  Edward  the  First ;  but  it  is  not  known  by  whom  it  was 
first  built,  though  Mr.  Pennant  and  some  others  attribute  its  erection  to  a  Welsh  prince, 
at  a  time  when  it  is  admitted  that  Welsh  princes  made  but  little  distinction  between 
palaces  for  themselves  and  for  their  pigs.  About  fifteen  miles  to  the  westward  of  Crickaeth 
there  is  a  lofty  hill,  called  Cam  Madryn,  which  is  noted  for  having  been  a  strong  hold  of 
Roderick  and  Maelgwyn,  the  sons  of  Owen  Gwyneth.  There  are  many  remains  of  forti- 
fications upon  it,  from  which  may  be  ascertained  what  was  the  state  of  architecture  at  an 
early  period  among  the  Welsh.  "  The  bottom,  sides,  and  top  are  filled  with  cells,  oblong, 
oval,  or  circular,  once  thatched,  or  covered  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather:  many 
of  them  are  pretty  entire.  The  chieftains  resided  on  the  top ;  the  people  of  the  country, 
with  their  cattle,  in  times  of  invasion,  occupied  the  sides  and  bottom  *."  The  stones  of 

*  Pennant. 

the 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  163 

the  walls  are  not  connected  by  cement,  but  are  thrown  roughly  together,  and  with  infi- 
nitely less  attention  to  neatness  and  arrangement  than  would  be  observed  by  a  Briton  of 
the  present  day  in  the  construction  of  a  pig-sty. 

The  Welsh  Chronicle  makes  no  mention  of  Crickaeth,  and  there  are  no  records,  I 
believe,  of  its  ever  having  sustained  a  siege,  an  evidence  almost  as  convincing  as  its  mode 
of  architecture,  that  it  was  not  in  being  at  the  same  time  when  other  castles,  not  far 
removed  from  it,  were  alternately  rising  and  falling,  as  fast  as  these  changes  could  pos- 
sibly be  effected  by  human  means.  A  Welsh  hero,  Sir  Howel  y  Fwyall,  was  appointed 
constable  of  this  fortress  by  the  Black  Prince,  in  reward  of  his  valour  and  important 
services  at  the  battle  of  Poictiers.  He  is  said  to  have  fought  on  foot,  and  armed  only 
with  a  battle-axe,  with  which  he  committed  desperate  havoc  among  the  enemy.  His 
countrymen  declare,  that,  among  other  exploits,  he  cut  off  the  head  of  the  French  king's 
horse,  and  took  his  majesty  prisoner ;  but  history  ascribes  this  last  honour  to  Denis  de 
Morebeque,  a  knight  of  Artois.  In  addition  to  the  constableship  of  Crickaeth,  the  Black 
Prince  conferred  upon  him  the  distinction  of  knighthood,  and  ordered,  in  further  com- 
memoration of  iiis  services,  that  a  mess  of  meat  should  be  served  up  every  day  before  the 
battle-axe,  Avith  which  he  had  performed  such  prodigies  of  valour.  He  was  permitted 
also  to  add  a  battle-axe  to  his  coat  of  arms,  and,  in  allusion  to  the  same  formidable 
weapon,  or  his  formidable  use  of  it,  was  styled  Sir  Howel  y  Fwyall,  or  of  the  Axe.  Eight 
yeomen  attendants,  maintained  at  the  expense  of  the  crown,  were  appointed  to  guard  the 
mess,  which,  after  it  had  appeared  before  the  knight,  was  carried  down  and  distributed 
among  the  poor.  This  ceremony  was  continued  till  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  the  mess, 
after  the  death  of  Sir  Howel,  being  paraded  about  in  the  same  manner  as  during  his  life- 
time, and  given  to  the  poor  for  the  benefit  of  his  soul. 

There  is  a  small  town  at  Crickaeth,  a  faithful  copy  of  Harlech  in  all  its  signs  of  po- 
verty and  meanness.  It  is  a  borough-town,  contributory  to  Carnarvon,  and  contains  about 
four  hundred  inhabitants.  On  departing  from  hence  we  met  with  no  further  cause  of 
interruption  till  we  entered  the  harbour  of  Pwllheli,  a  natural  inlet  of  considerable  extent, 
but.  left  dry  at  low  water,  except  in  a  narrow  channel  formed  by  several  small  streams 
which  discharge  themselves  into  it.  There  is  a  large  rock  near  the  entrance,  called  the 
Gimlet,  which  is  of  service  as  a  guide  to  the  harbour,  and  protects  it  from  the  south- 
western sea.  As  the  tide  was  out,  our  boat  could  not  advance  far  up  the  haven ;  we 
therefore  landed  and  walked  for  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  over  sand  and  mud  to  the 
town,  where  "we  found  that  we  could  not  have  arrived  more  opportunely.  Some  parish 
business,  the  nature  of  which  I  could  not  exactly  ascertain,  had  drawn  together  a  number 
of  farmers  and  country  people  of  all  descriptions,  and  a  feast  was  prepared  for  them  at 
the  inn,  to  which  half  a  dozen  aldermen  might  not  have  disdained  to  sit  down.  Just 

O 

as  we  entered,  it  was  fuming  up  stairs,  in  a  long  file  of  roasted  and  boiled  meats,  flanked 
by  vegetables,  and  pies,  and  puddings,  and  followed  closely  by  a  crowd  of  people,  in 

whose 


164  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

whose  countenances  there  was  an  expression  of  satisfaction,  which  it  was  impossible  not 
to  go  along  with.  On  enquiring  what  was  the  particular  motive  for  so  much  luxury,  the 
landlady  declared  to  us,  that  there  was  nothing  particular  in  the  case ;  that  as  good  a 
dinner  was  served  up  at  her  house  every  market-day;  and  that  people  in  her  part  of  the 
world  knew  what  good  eating  was  as  well  as  other  folks,  and  could  eat  as  much.  Whether  she 
told  the  precise  truth,  or  was  warped  a  little  by  her  anxiety  to  give  us  a  high  idea  of  the 
civilization  of  her  country,  I  know  not ;  but  certain  it  is,  that  we  had  not  met  with  any 
thing  half  so  savory  for  many  a  day. 

In  about  two  hours  after  our  arrival,  the  whole  house  was  a  scene  of  uproar  and  con- 
fusion, almost  every  individual  of  the  company  being  perfectly  drunk,  and  each  amusing 
himself,  as  his  temper  urged,  with  singing  or  fighting.  To  get  them  all  fairly  out  of  the 
house  was  a  most  laborious  task,  and  for  hours  after  I  was  in  bed,  the  struggle  was  main- 
tained between  the  boisterousness  and  untractableness  of  the  men,  and  the  loud  but 
unavailing  remonstrances  of  their  wives.  Throughout  the  night,  I  was  periodically 
roused  by  a  sudden  clattering  of  feet  and  clamour  of  tongues  upon  tlie  stairs,  as  each 
unwilling  guest  was  forcibly  dragged  from  his  drink ;  and  the  morning  had  just  dawned 
when  the  last  party  of  the  '  jovial  crew'  were  turned  away,  amidst  anxious  vociferations 
for  more. 

A  feast  among  people  of  this  rank  in  life  would  have  ended  in  the  same  manner,  I 
believe,  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom ;  but  the  lower  orders  of  the  Welsh  have  the  cha- 
racter of  being  a  more  than  commonly  thirsty  race.  Drink  is  the  main  spring  of  their  convi- 
viality; and  indeed  all  their  meetings,  whether  on  occasions  of  mirth  or  melancholy,  have 
one  common  termination  in  deep  potations  of  ale.  The  ale  which  they  drink  is  exceed- 
ingly viscid,  and  is  said  to  have  a  most  deleterious  effect  on  their  constitutions,  inde- 
pendent of  the  injuries  resulting  from  its  intoxicating  qualities.  The  women  do  not 
indulge  in  this  seductive  poison,  and  no  one  can  travel  through  Wales  Avithout  observing, 
that  they  have  a  much  more  marked  appearance  of  health  and  strength  than  the  men.  I 
speak  of  this  love  of  liquor  in  the  Welsh  from  the  authority  of  others,  who  have  had 
opportunities  of  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  their  manners  than  I  have ;  for  though 
I  have  on  more  than  one  occasion  been  witness  to  scenes  among  them  of  the  same  cha- 
racter as  the  riot  at  Pvvllheli,  I  cannot  decide  from  the  sum  total  of  my  own  observations, 
that  they  drink  more  than  the  English.  I  have  never  been  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom 
when  a  wake  or  a  fair  happened  to  be  going  on,  that  general  drunkenness  did  not  form 
the  consummation  of  all  the  amusements  of  the  day.  It  seems  indeed  to  be  the  com- 
mon vice  of  the  country,  and  no  doubt  in  part  suggested,  as  it  must  be  admitted  in  some 
degree  to  justify,  that  coarse  and  bloated  figure,  which  has  been  sketched  out  as  the  repre- 
sentation of  John  Bull. 

Pwllheli  is  a  small  town,  consisting  of  only  one  street,  and  that  of  mean  appearance; 
but  it  is  the  largest  and  most  respectable  town  in  the  peninsula  of  Llyn.     It  carries  on  a 

considerable 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  165 

considerable  coasting  trade,  being  the  general  magazine  of  goods  from  which  all  the  sur- 
rounding villages  derive  their  supplies.  The  harbour  will  not  receive  vessels  of  more  than 
eighty  tons ;  but  it  is  easy  of  approach,  and  well  sheltered. 

Previous  to  our  arrival  here,  we  had  been  warned  that  this  town,  which  stands  in  the 
centre  of  the  south  coast  of  Llyn,  was  the  boundary  of  all  civilization  to  the  south-west, 
and  that  in  travelling  to  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  we  should  discover  through  every 
action  of  the  day,  on  the  road,  or  under  shelter,  that  we  were  in  a  barbarous  country. 
The  south-western  half  of  Llyn  lies  like  an  outcast  district,  not  communicating  with  any 
of  the  frequented  roads  of  the  country,  and  containing  very  little  within  itself  to  tempt 
the  intrusion  of  strangers.  Its  inhabitants  therefore  are  left  without  disturbance  in  a 
little  world  of  their  own,  where  they  quietly  rust  under  the  despotism  of  ignorance  and 
prejudice,  entirely  shut  out  from  all  the  common  stimulants  to  exertion  and  improve- 
ment. They  have  no  fear  of  being  surprised  in  an  undress  by  company,  and  sink  into 
sloth  and  slovenliness,  with  the  same  comfortable  apology  transmitted  from  generation  to 
generation — there  is  nobody  here  but  ourselves.  We  had  become  too  familiar  with  the 
asperities  of  by-roads,  and  the  penalties  that  are  incident  to  chance-guests,  to  be  easily 
intimidated,  and  therefore,  having  hired  horses  and  a  guide  at  Pwllheli,  set  forward  to 
explore  this  ultima  Thule,  and  with  no  unpleasing  anticipations  of  the  adventures  which 
awaited  us.  The  coast  continued  for  some  miles  flat  and  uninteresting ;  but  there  was 
ample  matter  of  attraction  in  the  forms  of  the  more  distant  scenery,  the  mountains,  and 
the  whole  of  the  long  and  varied  front  of  Cardigan  bay.  The  most  western  mountains  of 
Merionethshire  seemed  from  this  distance  to  rise  from  the  sea,  and  immediately  behind 
them  appeared  Cader-Idris,  with  his  summit  seen  only  in  parts  above  the  clouds.  We 
had  had  this  noble  mountain  constantly  in  sight  since  we  left  Aberystwith ;  but  after  this 
day's  journey  we  saw  it  no  more.  The  inland  country  of  Llyn,  to  the  southwest  of  Pwllheli, 
is  interspersed  with  a  few  insulated  and  rugged  hills  ;  but  it  is  generally  flat  and  mournfully 
naked.  I  was  informed  that  the  land  is  very  good,  and  capable  of  being  made  very  pro- 
ductive ;  but  it  is  wretchedly  cultivated,  and  in  many  parts  perfectly  waste.  Agriculture 
is  said  to  be  neglected  here  for  the  sake  of  the  fisheries ;  but  if  the  people  really  devote 
all  the  labour  of  their  lives  to  this  employment,  they  must  be  either  very  unskilful,  or 
very  unfortunate ;  for  they  are  obviously  most  deplorably  poor. 

In  about  an  hour  we  entered  Llan  Badrog,  a  village  of  a  few  hovels,  more  mean  and 
uncouth  than  any  that  I  have  yet  had  to  mention.  1  should  have  pronounced  their 
filthiness  to  be  the  least  tolerable  part  of  their  condition ;  but  as  this  might  have  been 
easily  remedied,  it  was  certainly  of  but  little  account  in  the  consideration  of  the  inha- 
bitants. They  may  indeed  have  submitted  to  it  as  the  lesser  of  tfro  evils :  dirt,  they  may 
think,  is  disagreeable  enough,  but  not  quite  so  much  so  as  that  little  addition  of  daily  toil, 
Avithout  which  cleanliness  cannot  be  maintained.  We  travelled  on  from  hence  for  six  or 
seven  miles,  without  meeting  with  any  thing  worthy  of  particular  remark,  when  we  came 

to 


166  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

to  Abersoch,  a  village  not  of  greater  extent,  but  rather  more  decent  character  than 
the  last.  Here  was  a  public-house  yielding  barley  bread  and  cheese,  and  some  weak 
and  very  turbid  ale.  The  landlady  confessed  to  us,  that  the  ale  was  rather  new,  and 
we  found  that  it  was  not  quite  cold,  having  been  made  in  the  course  of  the  morning. 
We  observed  her  dip  a  small  jug  into  an  earthen  pan,  which  stood  under  the  table,  and 
contained  all  that  had  been  brewed.  She  had  no  utensils,  she  said,  for  making  it  in 
larger  quantities,  and  therefore  always  brewed  as  soon  as  the  pan  was  empty,  and  used 
the  beer  as  soon  as  it  was  full.  The  same  kind  of  plan  or  pan  prevailed  at  several  other 
houses,  which  we  were  obliged  to  visit,  before  we  escaped  from  this  poverty-stricken 
district ;  yet  ale  is  regarded  by  the  people  as  their  greatest  luxury. 

Abersoch  stands  near  the  mouth  of  a  narrow  and  shallow  river,  the  Soch,  which, 
where  it  meets  the  sea,  spreads  out  into  a  broader  channel,  and  forms  a  harbour  for  small 
craft.  We  saw  a  sloop  there  discharging  a  cargo  of  limestone,  which  constitutes  the  sole 
article  of  importation.  A  few  fishing  boats  complete  the  wealth  of  the  port.  The  Soch 
opens  into  a  bay,  called  St.  Tudwal's  Road,  which  is  the  only  secure  place  of  shelter  for 
large  vessels  between  this  point  and  Fishguard  bay.  The  whole  front  of  Cardigan  bay  is 
exposed  to  the  west  wind,  from  which  this  roadsted  is  protected  by  the  inflection  of  the 
coast  of  Llyn  to  the  southward.  Two  small  islands,  called  St.  Tudwal's  and  Merecross 
Isles,  which  lie  at  a  short  distance  from  each  other,  and  about  half  a  mile  from  the  main- 
land, off  the  south  point  of  the  buy,  shelter  it  from  the  south,  and  indeed  a  few  vessels 
may  ride  with  safety  under  the  lee  of  these  islands,  from  whichever  point  the  wind  blows. 
Neither  of  the  islands  is  inhabited  by  man  ;  but  they  both  afford  pasture  for  a  few  sheep, 
and  are  amply  stocked  with  rabbits,  and  in  the  summer  season  frequented  by  hosts  of 
sea-fowl.  On  the  larger  of  the  two,  St.  Tudwal's,  there  was  formerly  a  chapel  dedicated 
to  the  saint  whose  name  it  bears ;  but  there  are  no  remains  of  it. 

As  we  approached  the  extremity  of  Llyn,  the  coast  became  more  bold  and  rocky:  it 
terminates  to  the  south  in  a  long  promontory,  called  Pen  Kilan,  and  from  thence  to  its 
most  western  boundary,  Braich-y-Pwll  Head,  its  front  is  exposed  to  a  vast  expanse  of 
sea,  and  has  been  broken  into  numerous  bays  and  creeks.  Pen  Kilan  forms  the  eastern 
point  of  a  bay  very  terrible  to  seamen,  and  known  by  the  appalling  name  of  Hell's 
Mouth.  There  was  nothing  in  its  external  form  which  to  the  eyes  of  us  landsmen  pointed 
out  the  terrors  of  its  true  nature;  but  we  saw  it  in  calm  weather,  and  with  the  firm  ground 
under  our  feet.  It  is  deeply  indented  into  the  land,  and  the  tide  sets  into  it  with  such 
exceeding  violence,  that  if  a  vessel  is  driven  by  a  southerly  wind  within  reach  of  its  attrac- 
tion, she  becomes  engulphed  beyond  the  possibility  of  escape.  A  tremendous  sea  rolls 
on  to  this  coast  in  gales  of  wind  from  the  south  and  southwest ;  and  as  the  wind  blows 
most  frequently  and  more  violently  from  these  points  than  from  any  other,  Hell's  Mouth 
is  a  subject  of  constant  alarm,  and  is  looked  upon  as  a  snare  that  is  always  ready  to  swal- 
low up  every  vessel  that  comes  within  the  radius  of  its  vortex.  It  may  be  mentioned  as 

some 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  167 

some  mitigation  of  the  horrors  of  this  bay,  that  when  a  vessel  is  cast  on  shore  in  it,  the 
crew  are  not  shut  out  by  an  insurmountable  barrier  from  the  land.  It  is  bounded  by 
steep  cliffs ;  but  they  are  not  very  lofty,  nor  so  steep  as  to  prevent  any  one  from  clam- 
bering up  them  with  ease  and  safety.  As  the  tide  was  out,  we  rode  for  two  or  three  miles 
at  the  base  of  the  cliffs  upon  a  hard,  smooth  sand,  till,  taking  advantage  of  an  easy  ascent 
to  the  land,  we  left  the  shore,  and  soon  gained  a  road  which  was  nearly  up  to  our  horses' 
knees  in  stones.  Our  course,  too,  lay  for  a  long  way  up  hill,  and  we  were  journeying,  as 
we  had  been  for  some  time,  in  a  steady  rain,  so  that  altogether  we  may  be  said  not  to  have 
escaped  from  Hell's  Mouth  into  Paradise. 

We  paused  at  the  top  of  the  hill  for  the  sake  of  our  horses,  and  took  shelter  in  an 
unfinished  house,  which  promised  to  become  a  more  decent  habitation  than  any  we  saw 
till  we  again  got  into  the  land  of  civilization.     Near  it  were  a  few  of  the  common   wig- 
wams   of  the  country,  and   from  them   there  presently  issued  a  flock  of  women  and 
children,  who,  in  their  manners  and  appearance,  really  bore  a  nearer  resemblance  to 
savages,  than  any  creatures  whom,  in  spite  of  the  warning  that  we  had  received,  I  had 
expected  to  encounter.     They  all  entered  the  place  where  we  were  standing,  and  scru- 
tinized us  with  great  boldness  and  familiarity.     One  of  the  women  seized  hold  of  my 
umbrella,  and  began  to  examine  it  with  eager  attention ;  but  after  pulling  and  twisting;  it 
about  with  truly  Hottentot  awkwardness,  she  returned  it  to  me  without  having  made  any 
discoveries  as  to  the  nature  of  the  machine.  When  I  unfurled  it,  and  held  it  over  her  head, 
conviction  burst  upon  her  at  once,  and  she  again  took  possession  of  it,  and  continued  to 
open  and  close  it  for  some  time  with  tolerable  facility,  and  very  much  to  the  amusement 
of  herself  and  her  companions.    None  of  them  could  speak  English ;  but  we  learned  from 
our  guide,  that  they  were  much  astonished  at  the  sight  of  us,  and  very  pressing  in  their 
enquiries  as  to  the  motive  that  could  have  brought  us  among  them.     This,  however,  we 
could  not  unfold  to  their  satisfaction.    We  continued  our  journey  with  our  umbrellas  over 
our  heads,  and  they  followed  us  for  some  distance  with  as  much  interest  and  curiosity  as 
if  we  had  been  going  off  in  a  balloon. 

O  O 

As  the  evening  was  now  advancing,  and  the  rain  increasing,  we  became  anxious  to 
move  on  with  all  possible  speed,  and  therefore  dismounted  from  our  horses,  and  leaving 
them  with  our  guide,  went  forward  on  foot.  In  a  short  time  we  struck  into  a  road, 
intersected  at  every  twenty  yards  by  a  knee-deep  river,  and  thus,  with  a  torrent  above  and 
below,  we  splashed,  and  plunged,  and  floundered  into  Aberdaron.  Here  there  was  no 
sign  of  entertainment  for  man  or  horse,  so  we  knocked  at  the  door  of  a  vile  hovel,  to 
enquire  which  was  the  inn,  when  a  man  came  forward  and  told  us,  that  we  had  no  further 
to  go,  and  begged  us  to  walk  in.  The  rain  and  darkness  without  left  us  no  alternative, 
and  wet,  and  hunger,  and  fatigue  had  disposed  us  not  to  be  fastidious ;  but  in  spite  of 
this  seasoning,  we  could  not  submit,  with  any  degree  of  complacency,  to  the  circum- 
stances which  here  conspired  to  disgust  us.  We  were  obliged  to  sit  in  the  common  room  of 

z  the 


168  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  family ;  but  this  we  should  not  have  complained  of,  had  it  been  only  decently  clean, 
only  so  clean  as  not  to  be  equally  offensive  to  the  nose  as  to  the  sight.  The  black  bread, 
and  the  homeliness  of  every  thing  that  was  offered  to  us  to  eat  and  drink,  we  could  have 
borne;  but  the  filthiness  of  every  thing  was  insufferable.  Yet  the  family  themselves, 
under  every  provocation  that  ought  to  make  people  miserable,  were  most  perversely 
happy  and  content.  I  hope  that  I  may  not  be  misunderstood :  contentment,  under  a  con- 
dition that  does  not  admit  of  change,  deserves  nothing  but  praise;  I  object  only  to  that 
invincible  sluggishness,  which  creates  evils,  and  bears  them,  with  equal  indifference. 
Men  who  are  engaged  from  morning  to  night  in  hard  labour,  that  they  may  gain  the 
necessaries  of  life,  are  apt  to  overlook  those  lesser  cares,  which  tend  only  to  polish  and 
purify  it.  These  are  consigned  to  the  hands  of  the  women  ;  they  are  the  natural  refiners 
of  ever}7  thing  that  is  offensive  to  sweetness  and  cleanliness,  and  on  them  therefore  de- 
volve the  important  duties  of  the  scrubbing-brush.  How  actively  they  in  general  exert 
themselves  in  their  calling,  it  requires  not  my  voice  to  prove ;  but  I  am  sorry  to  say,  that 
the  females  of  this  little  corner  at  Aberdaron  Avere  exceedingly  remiss  in  their  office,  and 
though  there  were  three  or  four  of  them  in  the  family,  they  all,  with  a  most  unpardonable 
neglect  of  discipline,  connived  at  the  filth  by  which  they  were  surrounded. 

Adjoining  the  place  in  which  we  sat,  there  was  another  room  occupied  by  a  woman 
and  her  children,  who  lived  as  lodgers  in  the  house :  in  the  course  of  the  evening  they 
joined  us,  and  with  this  addition  our  apartment  was  filled  to  its  corners.  The  landlord 
and  ourselves  were  the  only  persons  in  the  company  Avho  wore  shoes  and  stockings,  some 
of  the  women,  as  they  sat,  exposing  their  bare  legs  nearly  up  to  their  knees.  Jt  is  sin- 
gular that  this  barbarous  custom  should  be  confined  to  the  sex,  which  is  undoubtedly 
most  inclined  by  nature  to  dress  and  decoration :  in  Wales,  as  in  Scotland,  while  the  men 
are  clothed  like  a  civilized  people,  the  women  paddle  about  with  naked  feet. 

At  an  early  hour  we  begged  to  be  shewn  to  our  beds,  and  were  conducted  up  stairs 
into  a  room  of  large  dimensions,  which  occupied  the  whole  of  the  upper  part  of  the  house. 
As  we  entered  by  a  dim  light,  we  could  just  perceive  that  it  was  crowded  with  lumber, 
and  had  to  grope  our  way  to  our  beds  through  rows  of  wooden  stools  and  spinning- 
wheels.  After  what  I  have  said  regarding  the  general  state  of  the  household,  it  is  unne- 
cessary to  mention  the  style  of  the  beds :  sleep  was  necessary,  and  we  were  very  for- 
tunately quite  prepared  by  fatigue,  to  sink  into  immediate  unconsciousness  of  all  external 
circumstances.  I  awoke  in  the  night,  and,  with  some  surprise,  found  that  the  room  was 
alive  in  every  corner ;  on  the  return  of  light  I  discovered  that  the  whole  family  had  shared 
it  with  us.  It  may  be  expected  perhaps  that  there  was  some  little  hesitation  as  to  who 
should  get  up  first,  but  there  was  no  such  thing:  the  landlord  woke  first,  and  with  a  pro- 
digious yawn,  which  roused  the  whole  room,  jumped  out  of  bed,  followed  in  a  moment  by 
the  women  and  children,  who  all  bustled  into  their  clothes  in  a  few  seconds,  and  then 
left  us  to  ourselves.  It  was  not  yet  five  o'clock ;  but  we  were  well  pleased  with  this 

opportunity 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GRKAT    BRITAIN.  169 

opportunity  of  rising,  and  soon  found  ourselves  out  of  doors,  where  we  breathed  the  pure 
air  of  the  morning,  fresh  from  the  sea,  with  peculiar  satisfaction. 

The  village  had  few  claims  on  our  attention  :  it  is  very  small,  and,  though  with  so 
many  vivid  recollections  in  my  mind,  I  could  not  but  admit,  that  the  inn  was  by  no 
means  the  most  sordid  habitation  in  the  place.  A  clear  stream  of  water,  the  Daron, 
flows  close  by  the  doors  of  the  cottages ;  but  the  people  are  quite  insensible  to  half  the 
value  of  this  precious  element.  About  fifty  yards  below  the  village,  the  river  joins  the 
sea,  in  a  small  sandy  bay,  where  the  fishermen  have  a  safe  landing-place  and  shelter  for 
their  boats.  The  bay  is  protected  from  the  west  by  a  headland,  and  the  force  of  the 
southern  sea  is  broken  by  two  insulated  rocks,  called  Ynys  Gwylan.  This  part  of  the 
coast  abounds  with  fish,  and  among  the  rarer  kinds,  with  the  John  Dory,  which,  till  of 
late  years,  the  people  are  said  to  have  considered  by  far  too  ugly  a  thing  to  be  eaten. 
Herrings  visit  all  the  bays  and  creeks  in  vast  shoals,  and  the  fishermen  rely  upon  them 
for  their  principal  support.  The  vicinity  of  good  markets  at  Liverpool  and  on  the  Irish 
coast,  gives  them  opportunities  of  turning  this  fishery  to  great  account;  but  they  are  not 
supplied  with  suitable  boats  and  nets,  and  without  some  assistance  they  cannot  procure 
them. 

We  had  intended  to  proceed  from  hence  to  the  island  of  Bardsey ;  but  there  was  too 
much  wind  for  us  to  attempt  the  passage  with  safety,  and  we  had  not  fortitude  enough  to 
remain  at  this  wretched  place  till  the  weather  became  more  favourable.  There  is  a  furious 
race  in  the  sound  between  the  island  and  the  mainland,  which,  together  with  a  strong 
wind,  was  more  than  a  man  could  prudently  encounter  in  an  Aberdaron  boat.  Our  disap- 
pointment was  not  a  matter  of  much  regret  to  us ;  for  we  had  reason  to  believe,  from  the 
accounts  of  others,  that  there  was  nothing  about  the  island  that  was  very  interesting,  or 
that  required  a  very  close  inspection.  The  landlord,  who  was  not  only  master  of  the 
inn  but  the  chief  fisherman  of  the  place,  proposed  to  us,  as  the  best  resource  under  our 
present  circumstances,  that  while  the  kettle  was  boiling,  we  should  walk  to  a  high  place, 
from  whence  we  might  see  the  island  very  clearly.  We  immediately  set  forward,  and, 
after  a  walk  of  nearly  three  miles,  began  to  ascend  a  very  lofty  hill,  which  on  its  western 
side  juts  out  into  the  sea,  and  forms  the  vast  promontory  of  Braich  y  Pwll.  From  the 
summit  we  had  a  very  distinct  view  of  Bardsey,  which  lay  at  the  distance  of  not  more 
than  two  miles  to  the  southward  of  us.  Its  east  end  is  occupied  by  a  mountain, 
which  presents  a  rocky  precipice  to  the  sea,  but  gradually  slopes  away  towards  the  west, 
till  it  terminates  in  a  plain.  A  dark,  heavy  cloud  had  settled  on  its  summit,  which,  with 
the  raging  sea  that  encircled  its  base,  gave  it  a  grand,  wild,  and  gloomy  effect.  We  could 
not  see  a  tree  on  any  part  of  the  island,  and  its  whole  appearance  was  that  of  a  cheerless 
solitude,  fit  only  for  the  habitation  of  gulls  and  cormorants.  But  I  was  considering  it 
with  the  feelings  of  an  idle  man,  with  nothing  to  do  but  to  contrast  its  nakedness  with 
the  beauty  of  groves  and  fertile  meadows  :  the  few  poor  people  who  inhabit  it  have  half 

z  2  their 


170  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

their  time  and  all  their  thoughts  employed  by  the  toil  and  the  cares  of  gaining  their 
bread :  where  they  labour  is  a  matter  of  very  little  moment  to  them,  and  when  their 
labour  is  over,  they  require  no  enjoyment  but  rest. 

The  island  is  about  two  miles  in  length,  and  one  in  breadth;  the  mountainous  part 
is  perfectly  barren ;  but  there  is  some  good  land  on  the  plain,  which  produces  wheat  and 
barley,  and  pasture  for  a  few  cows  and  sheep.  Much  of  the  low  land,  however,  is  said  to 
be  of  very  little  value.  There  are  about  a  dozen  houses  on  the  island,  and  between  sixty 
and  seventy  inhabitants,  who  divide  their  time  between  agriculture  and  fishing,  and  by 
these  pursuits  just  gain  a  subsistence,  to  which,  in  the  summer  season,  they  sometimes 
add,  by  way  of  luxury,  the  eggs  of  sea-fowl. 

In  the  early  ages  of  Christianity  Bardsey  was  an  asylum  for  religious  recluses,  who 
fled  to  it  from  the  temptations  of  public  life,  and  the  persecution  of  Saxon  invaders.  It 
became  in  time,  from  some  other  circumstances  of  powerful  attraction  not  exactly 
known,  probably  from  the  fame  of  some  eminent  individual,  distinguished  above  every 
other  holy  haunt  in  Wales  for  the  numbers  and  sanctity  of  its  pious  inhabitants.  Exclu- 
sive of  a  meaner  multitude,  twenty  thousand  saints  are  said  to  have  lived  and  been  buried 
here ;  though  Fuller  rather  sceptically  adds  to  this  report,  that  it  would  be  more  easy  to 
find  graves  in  Bardsey  for  so  many  saints,  than  saints  for  so  many  graves.  Who  were 
the  earliest  devotees  who  frequented  this  island  is  uncertain  ;  but  it  must  no  doubt  have 
required  a_series  of  ages  to  complete  this  prodigious  accumulation  of  saints  ;  for  I  suppose 
that  not  more  than  a  hundred  at  a  time  could  have  been  crowded  with  any  degree  of 
comfort  into  so  small  a  space.  Saint  Dubritius,  after  the  resignation  of  his  primacy,  and 
when  broken  down  by  age  and  infirmity,  retired  hither  to  die  in  612  ;  and  Mr.  Pennant 
reasonably  imagines,  that  there  must  have  been  some  motive  for  his  preference  of  this 
spot,  and  that  it  was  probably  the  sanctity  which  it  had  derived  from  some  religious 
establishment  previous  to  this  period.  Giraldus  observes  of  the  state  of  Bardsey  in  his 
time—"  This  island,  either  from  the  wholesomeness  of  its  climate,  owing  to  its  vicinity  to 
Ireland,  or  rather  to  some  miracle  obtained  by  the  merits  of  the  saints,  has  this  woncd  rful 
peculiarity,  that  the  oldest  people  die  first;  because  diseases  are  uncommon,  and  scarcely 
any  die,  except  from  extreme  old  age*."  I  did  not  hear  that  this  singular  favour  is 
extended  to  its  present  inhabitants;  but  then  they  have  no  saints  among  them,  and 
commit  all  their  spiritual  concerns  to  the  care  of  an  uncanonical  rustic.  At  the  time  of 
the  dissolution  there  was  an  abbey  at  Bardsey,  dedicated  to  St.  Mary,  whose  revenues, 
according  to  Dugdale,  were  46/.  Is.  4d.  The  Abbot's  house  and  a  small  ch.jpel  still 
remain  ;  but  there  are  no  traces  of  those  extensive  buildings,  which  must  have  bt-cu  neces- 
sary tor  the  accommodation  of  the  numerous  population,  in  the  days  of  the  twenty  thou- 
sand saints. 

•  Hoare's  Giraldus,  Vol.  II.  p.  83. 

We 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  171 

We  observed  the  remains  of  a  chapel  on  the  promontory  of  Braich  y  Pwll.  It  was 
called  Capel  Fair,  the  Chapel  of  our  Lady,  and  was  placed  here,  Mr.  Pennant  remarks, 
to  give  the  seamen  an  opportunity  of  invoking  the  tutelar  saint  for  protection  through  the 
dangerous  sound  of  Bardsey.  Not  far  from  it  are  the  ruins  of  Capel  Anhelog,  the  Chapel 
without  Endowment;  but  they  escaped  our  notice. 

In  our  way  back  to  Aberdaron  we  passed  by  a  methodist  meeting-house,  a  respectable 
building,  lately  erected  in  the  place  of  a  small,  mean  hovel,  in  which  the  duties  of  the  ta- 
bernacle were  performed,  till  the  growing  congregation  could  no  longer  be  confined  within 
its  walls.  The  prostrate  chapels  of  the  saints,  and  this  newly-raised  building,  naturally 
incline  the  thoughts  to  the  changes  of  religious  feeling  and  opinion,  and  the  various  arti- 
fices and  forms  of  imposture,  by  which  religion  is  made  an  instrument  of  mere  worldly 
interest  and  ambition.  The  saints  have  had  their  day  in  Wales,  and  they  are  now  de- 
spised or  forgotten  ;  but  the  morbid  faith  by  which  their  credit  was  supported  has  only 
changed  its  objects,  and  withdrawn  from  St.  David  and  his  partners  on  the  Calendar, 
to  rest  on  cobblers,  tinkers,  or  any  one,  whatever  may  be  his  condition,  if  he  can  rant, 
and  jump,  and  groan,  and  sanctify  his  harlequinade  by  a  few  scraps  from  the  Scriptures. 
Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  I  mean  to  include  all  Methodist  teachers  in  this  ignorant 
mob :  there  are  men  among  them  who,  whatever  may  be  the  purity  and  disinterestedness 
of  their  motives,  are  of  undoubted  learning  and  ability ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  true,  and  it 
is  one  of  the  most  alarming  injuries  offered  by  the  sect  to  the  dignity  and  respectability 
of  religion,  that  the  grossest  ignorance  and  folly  do  not  exclude  a  man  from  a  voice  in  the 
tabernacle.  Any  canting  vagrant,  who  preaches  under  a  hedge,  can  secure  an  audience, 
and  an  audience  too  that  can  be  moved  by  his  frantic  exhortations,  and  furious  gestures, 
to  groans  and  tears. 

We  have  no  reason  to  regret  the  disrepute  into  which  the  saints  have  fallen  in  this 
country,  or  the  abolition  of  monasteries  and  other  encumbrances ;  but  there  can  be  no 
question  that  the  whole  establishment,  with  all  its  corruptions,  was  infinitely  preferable  to 
Methodism.  It  is  better  that  religion  should  be  burdened  with  a  redundancy  of  state  and 
show,  than  that  it  should  be  left  unprotected  by  all  decent  ceremony,  and  exposed  to 
the  uninstructed  criticism  and  coarse  familiarity  of  the  rabble.  Its  simplest  and  most 
intelligible  duties  might  incur  some  chance  of  abasement  and  contempt,  under  the  reason- 
ing and  oratory  of  apostles  in  leathern  aprons ;  but  what  are  we  to  expect  when  such 
people  rise  up,  not  to  tell  us  to  be  sober  and  honest,  and  love  one  another,  but  to  rave 
about  inward  grace,  and  other  mysterious  emotions  ? 

1  have  been  led  by  curiosity  into  assemblies  of  Methodists  of  the  very  rankest  descrip- 
tion botli  in  Wales  and  England  :  in  the  former,  rny  ignorance  of  the  language  confined 
my  observ.ition  to  the  wild  gesticulations  and  active  capers  of  the  preacher,  and  the  sighs 
and  dismal  looks  of  his  disconsolate  congregation;  but  in  England  his  discourse  com- 
manded all  my  attention,  and  certainly  nothing  that  I  have  heard  from  any  being  out  of 

a  strait 


172  VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

a  strait  waistcoat,  ever  so  outraged  common  sense  and  decorum.  To  commit  what  I 
heard,  or  any  part  of  it,  distinctly  to  memory,  was  quite  out  of  the  question.  It  was 
a  monstrous  medley,  consisting  of  an  exposition  of  hell-torments,  in  brutal  and  ferocious 
terms;  a  farrago  of  impenetrable  absurdity  about  grace,  with  the  name  of  Jesus,  endlessly 
repeated,  and  with  a  most  shocking  and  impious  familiarity.  There  is  nothing  indeed 
more  particularly  offensive  in  the  whole  style  of  worship  among  these  people,  than  the 
tone  of  irreverent  freedom  with  which  they  address  the  Deity.  When  an  illiterate 
mechanic  undertakes  to  preach  the  nature  and  necessity  of  inward  grace  without  book, 
it  may  naturally  be  expected  that  he  will  come  to  frequent  checks  in  the  current  of  his 
unpremeditated  nonsense ;  and  on  these  occasions  he  invariably  helps  himself  on  by 
appeals  to  the  name  of  Jesus,  with  a  long  string  of  endearing  epithets,  which  could  be 
only  decent  in  the  address  of  a  man  to  his  mistress,  or  a  mother  to  her  infant;  though  they 
are  delivered  with  an  abject  whine,  and  detestable  slang,  that  remind  one  rather  of  the 
cant,  the  *  bless  your  precious  eyes  and  limbs'  of  a  St.  Giles's  beggar.  In  their  denuncia- 
tions against  the  Devil,  these  preachers  affect  a  blustering,  bullying  manner,  which, 
though  not  so  presumptuous  as  their  language  to  the  Deity,  is  exceedingly  preposterous 
and  ridiculous.  One  of  them,  after  explaining,  in  his  most  insane  style,  the  mysteries 
of  religious  passion,  and  being  convinced,  from  the  groaning  responses  of  his  congre- 
gation, that  he  had  saved  them  all,  exclaimed  in  a  transport  of  elevated  piety — '  We 
will  make  the  Devil  a  bankrupt,  and  leave  him  neither  dish  nor  spoon.'  They  have  a 
set  of  phrases  too,  by  which  they  describe  some  of  their  most  etherial  emotions,  that  are 
peculiarly  disgusting,  and  that,  one  should  imagine,  could  scarcely  be  separated,  even  in 
the  minds  of  these  ardent  devotees,  from  the  gross  associations  which  are  naturally  con- 
nected with  them :  they  really  seem  to  have  formed  a  vocabulary  for  '  religious  courtship' 
from  the  language  of  animal  passion.  These  loose  expressions,  indeed,  and  the  spiritual 
sinkings  and  ecstacies  which  they  are  intended  to  represent,  are  not  peculiar  to  the  vulgar 
of  the  sect,  but  are  common  to  all,  high  and  low.  In  the  '  Evangelical  and  Methodist 
Magazines,'  chronicles  which  the  High  Priests  of  the  Tabernacle  have  distinguished  by 
their  countenance  and  contributions,  there  are  cases  of  patients  under  heavenly  visitations, 
detailed  in  terms,  which,  if  it  were  not  for  their  horrible  combination  with  the  most 
sacred  names,  one  could  interpret  only  as  the  effusions  of  undisguised  lasciviousness. 
The  poor  wretches,  whose  excesses  have  been  thus  disgracefully  published,  may  have 
been  merely  mad  ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe,  that  some  of  the  most  frantic  meetings 
of  Methodists,  their  love  feasts,  &c.  though  they  may  be  founded  with  no  evil  intention,  do 
verily  lead  to  scenes  of  actual  debauchery.  This  may  appear  a  cruel  insinuation  against 
those,  who  deem  all  but  themselves  carnal  people,  and  reject  the  most  harmless  amuse- 
ments as  sources  of  sin,  but  it  is  notorious,  that  their  inflexible  seriousness,  their  gloom 
and  their  melancholy,  and  the  hopes  and  fears  that  inspire  them,  have  no  good  effect  upon 
their  conduct  in  any  of  the  relations  of  life.  Truth,  honesty,  and  plain-dealing,  they 

talk 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  173 

talk  very  little  about :  straight  hair,  and  a  long,  sneaking,  condemned  face,  they  think,  are 
surer  passports  to  heaven. 

A  very  great  loathing  for  the  whole  character  of  Methodism  has  led  me  to  speak  of 
it  with  more  warmth  than  may  perhaps  be  conceived  decorous ;  but  it  is  a  subject  on 
which,  if  one  speaks  at  all,  he  cannot  speak  coldly.  The  sect  have  become  not  only  for- 
midable from  their  numbers,  but  have  grown  so  outrageous  in  their  extravagance,  that 
the  remonstrances  of  those,  who  have  a  real  regard  for  the  cause  of  religion,  and  the  dig- 
nity of  human  reason,  may  have  no  effect,  but  certainly  cannot  be  too  severely  applied. 
We  have  just  seen  a  wretched  woman,  either  a  tool  or  a  victim,  in  the  metropolis  of  the 
most  enlightened  country  of  Europe,  successfully  maintain  a  monstrous  and  long-pro- 
tracted fraud,  suited  only  to  the  conception  of  the  vilest  savages  on  the  earth,  and  finding 
dupes  not  only  among  the  low  and  the  ignorant,  but  among  many  of  respectable  rank,  and 
(mirabile  dictu  ! )  out  of  a  mad-house.  There  is  no  foolery  too  gross,  no  imposition  too  palpa- 
ble, for  belief  and  respect,  with  minds  that  have  once  sucked  in  the  drivellings  of  Methodism. 
Here  was  a  wretch,  not  only  without  any  symptoms  of  inspiration,  but  with  no  one 
natural  quality  that  could  gain  the  respect  of  her  fellow-creatures,  a  poor,  weak  woman, 
diseased  alike  in  body  and  in  mind,  who,  on  the  simple  credit  of  her  own  raving  declara- 
tions, could  fix  a  persuasion,  that  she  was  about  to  be  the  instrument  of  a  miracle  of  mo- 
mentous consequence  to  the  salvation  of  mankind.  No  illusion  was  ever  supported  with 
such  invincible  obstinacy  :  the  miracle  was  postponed,  but  was  expected  still — was  expected 
when  the  poor  lunatic  lay  on  her  death-bed — when  she  was  dead — when  her  corpse  be- 
trayed the  last  disgusting  signs  of  its  mortality;  and  is  expected,  there  is  reason  to  believe, 
now  that  it  is  rotting  in  the  earth.  Fanaticism  of  this  complexion,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is 
beyond  the  reach  of  reasoning  or  remonstrance,  and  must  run  its  course,  and  fall  under 
its  own  weight.  Let  us  hope  that  it  may  not  sweep  down  all  sound  religion  and  morality 
in  its  ruin. 

My  remarks  on  this  subject  have  been  principally  suggested  by  what  has  fallen  under 
my  own  immediate  observation  ;  the  indignities  that  are  offered  to  every  thing  that  should 
be  held  most  sacred  in  religion,  by  preachers  from  the  lowest  and  most  ignorant  of  the 
people.  Methodism  is  sufficiently  obnoxious  to  common  sense  and  rational  feeling,  how- 
ever it  may  be  explained  ;  but  if  we  could  stop  the  mouths  of  these  plebeian  declaimers,  we 
should  check  one  great  cause  of  its  diffusion  among  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  under 
its  most  alarming  form.  A  greater  degree  of  earnestness  and  activity  on  the  part  of  the 
regular  Clergy,  has  been  recommended  as,  at  least,  a  probable  check  to  this  torrent  of  fana- 
ticism ;  and  if  there  is  any  hope  from  such  a  remedy,  it  is  most  emphatically  called  for  in 
Wales,  where  the  Methodists  are  in  more  than  common  force,  and  where  the  clergy  of 
the  Establishment,  if  thejr  do  not  want  zeal  for  the  cause,  are,  without  doubt,  in  many 
instances  exceedingly  ill  qualified  to  maintain  it.  The  stipends  of  the  curates,  on  whom, 
with  whatever  propriety  it  may  be,  the  chief  burden  of  the  battle  rests  on  the  side  of  the 

church, 


174  VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

church,  are  generally  so  small,  that  no  men,  with  the  birth  and  education  of  gentlemen, 
will  submit  to  starve  on  them,  and  they  are  therefore  made  over  to  very  well-meaning, 
hard-working  people,  perhaps,  but  too  ignorant  withal,  to  perform  the  duties  of  teachers 
with  any  kind  of  creditor  success.  Their  ignorance,  it  may  be  said,  is  not  quite  so  great 
as  that  of  their  fanatical  opponents ;  but  these  have  the  advantage  of  supporting  a  religion 
far  more  calculated  to  captivate  the  feelings  of  the  multitude ;  a  religion  of  passion  and 
phrenzy,  which  a  fool  may  provoke,  but  which  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  combination  of 
reason  and  eloquence  can  effectually  subdue.  The  despised  curate,  on  the  other  hand, 
goes  plodding  on  in  a  very  sober  and  upright  manner,  but  unfortunately  with  no  qualifica- 
tions that  are  likely  to  secure  or  reclaim  his  parishioners.  The  meanness  of  his  external 
condition  combines  to  weaken  his  influence  over  them :  he  cannot  command  their 
respect  by  the  show  of  respectable  rank  in  society,  nor  move  their  gratitude  by  acts  of 
charity  in  the  days  of  their  distress.  A  man  who  with  daring  impiety  declares  that  he 
has  received  a  call,  or  a  divine  monition  to  become  a  preacher,  will,  though  he  be  in  rags, 
find  multitudes  to  believe,  to  listen  to  him,  and  to  clothe  him ;  but  if  a  poor  curate,  who 
is  ennobled  by  no  such  inspiration,  is  seen  in  the  familiar  scenes  of  life,  in  degrading 
situations,  lighting  his  own  fire,  or  cleaning  his  own  shoes,  he  will  unquestionably  lose, 
together  with  his  dignity,  a  portion  of  his  authority.  Poverty  makes  men  ridiculous,  and 
it  may  make  them  so  even  in  the  eyes  of  the  poor,  under  circumstances  of  striking  con- 
trast. Those  whose  poverty  accords  with  their  rank  and  occupation,  those  who  dig  or 
those  who  beg,  do  not  excite  ridicule ;  but  a  parson  with  a  dirty  shirt,  or  a  hole  in  his  hat, 
will  hardly  escape  it.  It  requires  no  great  weight  of  reasoning  to  prove,  that  the  Esta- 
blished Church  should  be  at  least  reputably  supported,  and  the  sordid  state  of  the 
"Welsh  curacies  may  be  held  up  as  a  proper  subject  for  reformation,  without  any  reference 
to  the  increasing  dangers  of  Methodism. — Begging  the  reader  to  excuse  the  length  of  this 
digression,  I  now  return  to  my  journey. 

Our  course  from  Aberdaron  lay  along  the  north  coast  of  Llyn:  this  promontory 
divides  the  great  bays  of  Cardigan  and  Caernarvon,  which  fill  up  nearly  the  whole 
of  the  western  coast  of  Wales.  A  few  miles  to  the  northward  of  Braich  y  Pwll 
Head,  we  observed  a  huge,  craggy  rock,  several  hundred  yards  from  the  land,  called 
Maen  y  Mellt,  The  Stone  of  Lightning.  I  did  not  hear  why  it  has  received  this  name : 
some  years  ago  a  rock,  five  or  six  miles  farther  north,  which  is  said  to  have  risen  to  a 
great  height  above  the  sea,  suddenly  disappeared  in  the  night,  during  a  tremendous  storm 
of  thunder  and  lightning,  "  supposed  to  have  been  struck  down  by  the  resistless  bolt*."  One 
can  scarcely  suppose,  however,  that  a  stroke  of  lightning  could  have  had  power  to  shatter 
to  pieces,  or  cast  down,  so  compact  and  vast  a  body  :  the  storm  may  have  been  accom- 
panied by  a  gale  of  wind,  and  the  rock,  worn  perhaps  into  excavations  at  its  base,  have 

*  Pennant. 

been 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  175 

been  overthrown  by  the  sea.  Its  breadth,  of  course,  must  have  borne  a  very  small  proportion 
to  its  height,  or  fragments  of  it  would  still  appear  above  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  sub- 
ject would  bear  more  conjectures,  but  my  readers  may  think  that  they  may  be  dispensed  with. 
The  coast  on  this  side  of  Llyn  continues  rocky  and  rugged  for  about  four  leagues,  but  is 
generally  very  low.  About  two  miles  to  the  northward  of  Maen  y  Mellt  is  Forth  Colman,  a 
little  creek,  frequented  only  by  small  craft.  In  our  progress  further  north  we  passed  by 
several  creeks  of  a  similar  character,  all  dignified  with  the  names  of  Porths,  Ports,  and  all 
giving  shelter  only  to  a  few  fishing  boats.  After  a  walk  of  about  fifteen  miles,  we  arrived 
at  Porth  yn  Llyn,  which  seemed  to  justify  its  name,  and  exhibited  an  appearance  of  great 
commercial  importance.  The  harbour  was  crowded  with  brigs  and  sloops,  and  many  lay 
in  the  roads,  and  among  them  was  a  fine  ship  of  five  or  six  hundred  tons.  We  found, 
however,  that  these  vessels  had  merely  taken  shelter  here,  and  were  waiting  for  a  fair 
wind  to  carry  them  to  other  ports.  It  was  once  in  contemplation  to  have  made  this 
place  the  port  for  the  Dublin  packets,  and,  in  the  year  1806,  an  act  was  passed  for  con- 
structing a  pier ;  but  a  subsequent  application  to  parliament  for  pecuniary  aid  towards 
carrying  the  work  into  execution  was  not  attended  to,  and  the  projected  improvements 
were  transferred  to  Holyhead.  A  pier,  however,  has  been  begun,  and  indeed  so  far  ad- 
vanced as  to  form  a  harbour  of  great  importance  to  coasting  vessels  in  this  part  of  the 
channel.  If  it  were  completed,  Porth  yn  Llyn  would  certainly  be  one  of  the  best  har- 
bours on  the  coast  of  North  Wales.  It  is  situated  in  a  small  sandy  bay,  under  shelter  of 
a  projecting  point  of  land,  which  protects  it  from  the  west :  a  pier,  carried  out  from  this 
point  to  the  length  that  Avas  intended  towards  the  east,  would  effectually  secure  it  from 
the  only  wind  to  which  it  is  exposed.  There  are  four  or  five  small  and  really  decent 
houses  near  it,  the  principia  of  a  town  checked  in  its  growth  by  the  same  circumstances 
which  prevented  the  completion  of  the  pier. 

We  had  from  hence  a  view  of  the  Rival  Mountains,  a  singular  range,  distinguished  by 
their  sharp,  conical  summits.  Many  individual  mountains  in  Caernarvonshire  have  the  same 
figure ;  but  the  Rivals  are  remarkable,  as  constituting  a  group  uniformly  marked  by  this 
distinction,  and  all  of  nearly  equal  height.  One  of  them  juts  into  the  sea  about  four  miles 
to  the  northward  of  Porth  yn  Llyn,  and  is  one  of  the  grandest  objects  that  we  had  seen  on 
the  coast  in  the  whole  course  of  our  voyage.  Its  front  towards  the  sea,  to  the  height  of  at 
least  five  hundred  feet,  is  a  mass  of  bare  rock,  and  forms  a  most  terrific  precipice ;  above  this 
the  ascent  is  more  gradual,  and  spread  with  a  scanty  covering  of  heath ;  but  the  summit  rises 
up  in  a  pyramid  of  rock.  The  bay  of  Porth  yn  Llyn  is  about  a  mile  in  length,  and  is  se- 
parated by  a  point  of  land  from  the  lesser  bay  of  Nefyn,  in  which  there  is  also  a  harbour 
with  a  pier,  but  very  confined,  and  capable  of  receiving  only  small  vessels.  About  half  a 
mile  inland  is  the  little  town  of  Nefyn,  where  there  is  nothing  to  remark  but  poverty  in  its 
most  squalid  form.  The  inhabitants,  from  the  healthiness  of  their  countenances,  seem  to 
have  enough  to  eat  and  drink ;  but  they  are  destitute  of  all  the  comforts  peculiar  to 

A  A  civilized 


176  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

civilized  society,  and  yet  many  of  them  are  within  their  reach,  were  they  considered  worth 
the  trouble  of  obtaining.  We  had  received  very  encouraging  representations  at  Aber- 
daron,  of  the  accommodations  that  we  were  to  meet  with  here ;  but  we  gained  only  new 
proofs  of  the  exceeding  barbarism  of  the  people  in  every  part  of  this  ill-favoured  district.  They 
are  as  coarse  and  unformed  in  their  domestic  life  as  it  is  well  possible  for  human  creatures 
to  be,  and  if  there  is  any  pleasure  in  contemplating  society  in  such  a  state,  one  may 
indulge  it  here  as  well  as  in  the  interior  of  Africa,  with  the  advantage  too  of  being  among 
friendly  savages,  who  won't  eat  you  if  they  can  give  you  nothing  to  eat. 

At  an  earlier  period  of  its  history,  Nefyn  seems  to  have  been  a  place  of  more  im- 
portance than  it  is  at  present.  It  was  bestowed  by  the  Black  Prince  on  Nigel  de  Lo- 
hareyn,  and  made  a  free  borough,  and  was  allowed  a  guild  mercatory,  with  every  privi- 
lege attendant  on  other  boroughs.  It  also  received  a  grant  of  two  fairs  annually,  and  a 
market  on  a  Sunday. 

It  was  here  that  Edward  the  First  celebrated  his  complete  and  final  victory  over  the 
Welsh  by  a  most  magnificent  tournament.  The  nature  and  intention  of  this  exhibition 
are  thus  described : — "  A.  D.  1284,  King  Edward  the  First  having  completed  the  con- 
quest of  Wales,  either  to  shew  his  magnificence,  gratify  his  knights  who  had  served  him  in 
that  conquest,  or  to  entertain  his  new  subjects  with  a  spectacle  unknown  in  their  country, 
held  a  tournament  at  Nefyn,  a  town  in  Caernarvonshire,  lying  on  the  Irish  Channel.  It 
was  of  a  kind  called  the  Round  Table,  either  from  the  knights  dining  at  such  a  table,  or 
from  its  being  held  in  a  place  encircled  by  a  strong  wall  of  a  round  figure.  Tables  of 
that  form  had  been  in  constant  use  among  the  ancient  Gauls  and  Britons,  which  served 
to  give  rise  or  countenance  to  the  famous  Arthur's  round  table;  and  the  king,  perhaps, 
thought  it  not  amiss  to  shew  the  Welsh  that  he  was  not  inferior  to  that  renowned  British 
hero,  either  in  valour  or  magnificence :  an  infinite  number  of  knights,  as  well  foreigners 
as  English,  came  from  all  parts  to  share  in  this  military  diversion,  and  in  those  marks  of 
honour  which  were  distributed  on  such  occasions,  with  a  bounty  truly  royal,  by  a  prince 
who  knew  how  to  distinguish  merit,  and  always  exercised  his  judgment,  when  he  dis- 
played his  munificence*." 

This  pompous  exhibition,  however,  displays  rather  the  exultation  of  a  conqueror, 
than  any  generous  or  even  prudent  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  the  vanquished.  The 
Welsh  could  have  been  but  little  gratified  by  a  spectacle,  intended  to  celebrate  the  complete 
downfal  of  that  liberty,  which  they  had  struggled  for  centuries  to  uphold  ;  nor  were  they 
more  likely  to  be  conciliated  by  that  truly  royal  bounty,  that  lavished  their  lands  and 
possessions  on  those  who  had  been  most  active  in  effecting  their  subjugation.  The 
knights  and  courtiers  of  Edward,  who  had  been  the  instruments  of  his  designs  against 
Wales,  no  doubt,  took  a  lively  interest  in  his  munificence,  and  all  England,  perhaps,  was 

*  Carte's  History  of  England,  Vol.  II.  p.  1$7. 

sufficiently 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  177 

sufficiently  elated  by  the  splendour  of  his  success,  to  overlook  the  injustice  and  barbarity 
by  which  it  had  been  obtained.  But  there  is  a  time  when  every  story  should  be  told  with 
truth,  and  pointed  with  its  proper  moral,  and  one  does  not  expect,  that  sober  history 
should  enter  into  all  the  passion  of  past  times,  and  record  the  last  indignity  offered  to  a 
conquered  people,  in  a  tone  of  admiration  and  applause.  That  the  happiness  of  the 
Welsh  was  promoted  and  secured  by  their  union  with  England,  cannot  be  questioned ; 
but  this  circumstance  can  scarcely  be  brought  forward  in  justification  of  the  first  brutal 
invaders,  who  rushed  in  upon  them  with  fire  and  sword,  nor  of  the  long  system  of  oppres- 
sion to  which  they  were  afterwards  exposed,  nor  of  the  treachery  and  cruelty  by  which 
they  were  finally  subdued.  It  is  too  much  for  human  charity  to  believe,  that  the  nu- 
merous conquerors  who  deluged  Wales  with  blood,  had  her  welfare  in  view,  and  not  their 
own  interest  and  ambition.  We  have  recently  seen,  indeed,  in  the  instance  of  Norway, 
a  plan  adopted  for  making  a  people  happy  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  and  starving 
them  into  a  just  sense  of  their  own  advantages  ;  but,  in  spite  of  insinuating  proclamations, 
it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  such  savage  measures  with  benevolent  intentions,  or  to 
believe,  in  short,  that  there  was  any  other  object  in  contemplation,  but  to  satisfy  the 
rapacity  of  a  selfish  and  cold-blooded  adventurer.  The  experience  of  the  last  twenty 
years  has  proved,  that  we  have  at  least  as  much  to  fear  from  these  sentimental  invaders, 
as  from  more  honest  and  open  enemies. 

It  should  be  with  nations  as  with  individuals :  you  may  employ  all  the  force  of  reason 
and  persuasion  against  a  man  of  vicious  life ;  but,  if  he  keeps  within  the  bounds  of  the 
law,  and  does  not  injure  his  neighbours  as  well  as  himself,  you  cannot  flog  him  into 
virtue,  nor  despoil  him  of  his  estate,  and  give  it  to  another,  who  will  use  it  with  more 
prudence  and  propriety.  The  case  of  Wales,  under  her  ancient  government,  was  analo- 
gous to  that  of  a  man  under  such  circumstances  of  misconduct :  she  was  attacked  with 
the  sword,  (I  do  not  admit  with  honest  intentions,  but  the  consequence  was  the  same,)  and 
eventually  broken  down  and  forced  into  "order  and  civilization ;  but  who  would  quote  this 
as  a  precedent  for  imitation,  and  make  reform  a  general  plea  for  invasion  and  usurpation? 
If  a  man  cannot  be  moved  by  gentle  means  to  attend  to  his  own  welfare,  we  leave  him  to 
his  ruin,  rather  than  have  recourse  to  harsher  measures  of  correction,  and  break  through  a 
general  rule,  that  secures  the  weak  from  the  grasp  of  the  strong.  If  all  suppressors  of 
vice  were  paid  by  the  property  of  the  vicious,  who  that  had  any  thing  to  forfeit  and  no 
power  to  resist,  could  hope  to  escape  from  the  rigour  of  their  authority  ?  The  same 
restrictions  that  are  enforced  between  man  and  man,  are  equally  necessary  between 
nation  and  nation.  If  we  could  suppose  that  the  conquerors  of  Wales  had  nothing  in 
view  but  to  improve  the  government  of  the  country,  and  relieve  the  condition  of  its  inha- 
bitants, their  aggression  must  still  be  regarded  as  a  dangerous  and  unjustifiable  exertion 
of  power.  If  such  a  right  of  interposition  be  once  granted,  no  means  can  be  provided 
against  its  abuse.  The  usurpations  of  Bonaparte  were  accompanied  by  professions  of 

A  A  2  boundless 


178  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

boundless  philanthropy,  nor  have  plausible  pretences  been  wanting  for  the  dismember- 
ment of  Poland  and  the  transference  of  Norway. 

We  fortunately  procured  horses  from  a  farmer  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nefyn,  and 
were  enabled  almost  immediately  to  renew  our  journey.  The  country  adjoining  the 
coast,  between  Aberdaron  and  Nefyn,  is  generally  flat;  but  north  of  the  latter  town  the 
western  mountains  of  the  great  Snowdonian  range  advance  nearly  to  the  sea.  After  a 
long  ascent  we  dismounted  from  our  horses,  and  proceeded  to  explore  Nanty  Gwrtheyrn, 
or  Vortigern's  Valley,  to  which  king  Vortigern,  after  having  betrayed  his  country,  is  sup- 
posed to  have  retired  from  the  rage  of  his  subjects,  and  in  which  he  spent  the  last  days 
of  his  profligate  life.  It  is  a  deep  gloomy  hollow,  inclosed  to  the  east,  the  west,  and  the 
south,  by  the  stony  sides  of  the  Rival  Mountains,  and  to  the  north  opening  into  the  sea. 
His  enemies  could  scarcely  have  selected  for  him  a  more  dreary  place  of  imprisonment. 
At  present  there  is  nothing  but  the  tradition  of  its  name  to  connect  it  with  the  story  of 
Vortigern  ;  but  two  centuries  ago  it  presented  more  substantial  matter  to  the  zeal  and 
curiosity  of  antiquaries.  Mr.  Pennant  observes,  that  "  Till  the  beginning  of  the  last 
century,  a  tumulus,  of  stone  within,  and  externally  covered  with  turf,  was  to  be  seen  here; 
it  was  known  by  the  name  of  Bedd  Gwrtheyrn;  tradition  having  regularly  delivered 
down  the  report  of  this  having  been  the  place  of  his  interment.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
parish,  perhaps  instigated  by  their  then  minister,  Mr.  Hugh  Roberts,  a  person  of  curiosity, 
dug  into  the  earn,  and  found  in  it  a  stone  coffin,  containing  the  bones  of  a  tall  man*. 
This  gives  a  degree  of  credibility  to  the  tradition,  especially  as  no  other  bones  were  found 
near  the  earn ;  nor  were  there  any  other  tumuli  on  the  spot :  which  affords  a  proof  at 
least  of  respect  to  the  rank  of  the  person,  and  that  the  place  was  deserted  after  the 
death  of  the  royal  fugitive,  about  the  year  465."  If  there  is  no  suspicion  as  to  the  disco- 
very of  these  bones,  doubts,  I  fear,  may  arise  as  to  the  certainty  of  their  being  the  bones 
of  Vortigern.  The  common  account  of  his  death  does  not  countenance  the  supposition  : 
Fuller  says,  that  "  Vortiger,  the  British  king,  fled  into  Wales,  to  his  castle  Genereu,  impreg- 
nable for  situation,  which  he  mann'd  and  woman'd  (conveying  a  multitude  of  his  whores 
into  it),  and  there  lived  surfeiting  in  lust,  while  his  land  lay  sweltering  in  blood.  Here 
Aurelius  Ambrosius,  setting  fire  on  his  castle,  burnt  him  and  his  to  ashes -f."  The  super- 
stition of  the  times  afterwards  added  new  terrors  to  his  death,  magnifying  the  fire  by 
which  he  was  destroyed  into  lightning  sent  from  Heaven,  as  a  judgment  against  his 
wickedness.  If  his  castle  stood  in  this  valley,  it  could  not  have  been  rendered  impregnable 
by  its  situation;  so  that  there  may  be  doubts,  not  only  as  to  the  manner,  but  the  place  of 
his  death.  The  whole  subject  indeed  is  beyond  the  reach  of  trust-worthy  evidence,  and 
it  grieves  me,  though  not  much,  to  leave  it  as  dark  as  I  found  it. 

To  the  northeast  of  the  most  western  mountain  of  the  Rivals,  which  projects  into  the 

*  Kennel's  Paroch.  Antiq  Hist.  Allchester,  698.  t  Vide  Church  History. 

sea, 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  179 

sea,  there  is  a  small  interval  between  the  bases  of  the  hills  and  the  sea,  and  the  shore  be- 
comes low  and  sandy.  Our  road  lay  at  the  distance  of  about  half  a  mile  from  the  sea,  over 
a  most  dreary  and  uninteresting  country,  with  barren  and  stony  hills  immediately  to  our 
right,  which  concealed  from  us  the  grander  scenery  of  the  inland  mountains.  We  had  the 
sea  in  view  to  our  left,  and  part  of  the  western  coast  of  Anglesey,  which  forms  one  side  of 
Caernarvon  bay,  and  terminates  in  a  point  at  the  lofty  promontory  of  Holyhead.  With 
the  exception  of  this  cape,  it  appeared  to  be  extended  in  an  uniform  and  naked  flat. 

It  was  evening  when  we  arrived  at  Clynnog,  where  we  found  a  very  respectable 
inn,  and  enjoyed,  with  double  relish,  after  our  late  trials,  the  comforts  of  plenty  and 
the  luxury  of  cleanliness.  The  natural  scenery  also  about  Clynnog  formed  a  striking 
contrast  with  the  rude  country  that  we  had  just  passed.  It  stands  on  a  Avell-cultivated 
flat  bordering  the  sea,  and  is  embowered  in  a  little  wood,  which  combines  very  prettily 
with  the  cottages,  and  gives  to  the  place  more  of  the  true  character  of  a  rural  village  than 
is  often  exemplified  on  the  coast.  A  few  cows  in  an  adjacent  meadow,  and  flocks  of 
chickens,  ducks,  and  geese,  before  the  doors,  had  their  effect,  and  contributed  to  raise  an 
image  of  more  comfort  and  domestic  civilization  than  we  had  witnessed  for  some  time. 

The  village  is  very  small,  but  has  one  of  the  largest  and  most  elegant  churches  in  Wales. 
It  is  a  Gothic  building,  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  apparently  of  considerable  antiquity, 
though  it  seems  to  have  suffered  more  from  neglect  than  time.  Its  size  is  altogether  dis- 
proportioned  to  the  present  population  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  there  are  not  funds 
sufficient  to  keep  it  in  repair.  Its  length  from  the  western  entrance  to  the  extremity  of 
the  chancel  is  one  hundred  and  thirty-eight  feet,  and  across  the  transepts  about  seventy. 
There  is  very  little  ornament  about  its  architecture,  and  I  observed  no  monuments  in  it 
of  any  beauty,  interest,  or  antiquity.  It  is  dedicated  to  St.  Beuno,  a  saint  of  noble 
birth,  and  uncle  to  St.  Wenetrede,  the  celebrated  virgin  of  Holywell.  He  founded  a 
monastery  here  in  the  year  6l6,  and  many  centuries  after  his  demise  there  was  an  establish- 
ment of  Carmelites  or  White  Monks  here,  with  very  large  revenues.  Adjoining  the 
church  is  a  small  chapel,  called  Eglwys  Beuno,  where  the  saint  was  supposed  to  have 
been  buried,  and  where  Mr.  Pennant  saw  his  tomb,  which  he  describes  as  plain  and  altar- 
shaped.  This  was  removed  some  years  ao-o  by  order  of  Lord  Newborough,  who  was 
determined  to  ascertain  whether  his  remains  were  really  beneath  it.  The  workmen  dug 
to  the  depth  of  a  yard,  without  finding  any  traces  of  the  mouldering  worthy,  and  then 
gave  up  the  pursuit.  The  architecture  of  the  chapel  seems  to  be  of  the  same  date  as  that 
of  the  church,  and  as  both  were  built  many  centuries  after  the  death  of  Beuno,  his  tomb, 
if  not  his  body,  may,  in  the  revolutions  of  his  church,  have  changed  its  place.  Great 
faith  was  once  placed  in  his  power  over  various  diseases,  and  particularly  paralytic  affec- 
tions. The  ceremonies  of  those  who  desired  his  good  offices,  were,  first  to  dip  themselves 
in  a  well  near  the  church,  and  then  to  lie  for  a  whole  night  on  the  tomb  in  the  cluipel. 
Mr.  Pennant  actually  saw  a  featherbed  upon  the  tomb,  on  which  a  wretched  cripple  had 

stretched 


180  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

stretched  himself  in  full  confidence  of  relief.  Since  the  positive  demonstration  of  the 
saint's  alibi,  these  observances  have  been  discontinued  :  the  tomb  has  not  been  reinstated, 
and  the  well  has  become  overgrown  with  weeds  and  clogged  up  with  filth.  Offerings 
were  presented  on  Trinity  Sunday,  the  anniversary  of  the  saint,  and  were  very  mis- 
cellaneous and  whimsical.  A  fourpenny  piece  was  considered  as  exceedingly  propitiating, 
as  were  also  bread  and  cheese,  a  homely  gift,  but  not  unacceptable,  we  may  conceive,  to 
a  Welsh  saint.  All  calves  and  lambs  that  happened  to  be  cast  with  a  certain  mark  on 
the  ear,  called  N6d  Beuno,  were  devoutly  yielded  up.  The  offerings  were  delivered  to  the 
churchwardens,  who  sold  them,  and  deposited  the  money  in  a  venerable  and  myste- 
rious-looking oak  chest,  called  Cyff  Beuno,  so  strongly  secured,  that  it  is  proverbially  said 
among  the  Welsh,  of  any  thing  impossible  to  be  done,  "  You  may  as  well  attempt  to 
open  St.  Beuno's  chest*."  The  chest  still  keeps  its  place  in  the  church ;  but  its  locks 
have  now  no  treasure  to  guard,  all  respect  for  the  spirit  of  the  saint  having  been  utterly 
rooted  out  by  the  abortive  search  for  his  bones.  The  pick-axe  and  spade  of  the  antiquary 
have  not  always  done  so  much  service  to  the  cause  of  common  sense. 

There  is  little  to  notice  particularly  between  Clynnog  and  Caernarvon.  The  coast 
continues  low  and  sandy,  and  at  the  distance  of  about  eight  miles  reaches  the  central 
point  of  Caernarvon  bay,  of  which  the  southwestern  coast  of  the  Isle  of  Anglesey,  that 
projects  from  this  point,  forms  the  northern  horn.  The  island  is  separated  from  Caer- 
narvonshire by  a  sound,  called  the  Menai;  the  entrance  of  which,  at  this  southern 
extremity,  is  obstructed  by  long  banks  of  sand,  which  make  it  extremely  dangerous. 
It  is  rendered  also  very  narrow  by  two  low  points  of  land  which  project  from  the 
shore  on  each  side :  within  these  the  sound  spreads  into  a  fine  expanse,  more  than 
two  miles  broad,  but  gradually  contracts,  till  about  four  miles  north  of  Caernarvon  it 
becomes  less  than  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  and  continues  so  with  little  variation  for 
seven  miles  further  north,  when  it  opens  into  the  wide  and  beautiful  Bay  of  Beau- 
maris. 

To  the  north  of  Clynnog  the  mountains  gradually  recede  to  the  east,  and  as  you 
approach  Caernarvon  leave  a  considerable  plain  at  their  bases,  richly  covered  with  vege- 
tation, and  forming  a  very  pleasing  contrast,  as  it  lies  inlaid  between  their  dark  and 
rugged  sides  and  the  glittering  sea.  When  within  about  four  miles  of  the  town,  we  first 
discovered  the  numerous  and  lofty  towers  of  its  magnificent  castle,  covering  such  an 
extent  of  ground,  and  presenting  so  vast  a  mass  of  building,  that  it  made  every  other 
castle  that  we  had  yet  seen  in  Wales  quite  insignificant  in  our  recollection.  It  had  not, 
even  when  we  were  not  more  than  half  a  mile  distant  from  it,  the  slightest  appearance 
of  ruin,  but  seemed  to  stand  on  the  peaceful  plain,  as  perfect  and  commanding  as  when 
it  awed  the  country  round  five  centuries  ago.  As  we  passed  under  its  walls,  its  unguarded 

*  Pennant. 

gateways 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  181 

gateways  at  once  checked  all  the  wanderings  of  fancy ;  but,  excepting  some  of  the  bat- 
tlements, no  other  part  of  its  exterior  exhibited  any  material  signs  of  damage  or  decay. 

Caernarvon  is  very  delightfully  situated  on  the  border  of  the  Menai,  which  here 
assumes  the  character  of  a  deep  and  placid  river.  The  town  is  one  of  the  largest  in 
North  Wales,  and  unquestionably  one  of  the  handsomest.  The  oldest  part  of  it  is 
inclosed  in  walls,  defended  by  round  towers,  and  is  exceedingly  neat  and  compact.  The 
walls  and  towers  are  quite  entire.  As  long  as  Caernarvon  continued  a  military  station, 
the  whole  of  it  was,  of  course,  included  within  the  walls  ;  but  a  prosperous  trade  has  since 
gradually  extended  its  limits,  and  there  is  now  almost  as  much  of  the  town  without  the 
fortifications  as  within  them.  There  is  an  admirable  inn  here,  which  constitutes  the  great 
ornament  of  the  modern  town.  It  is  a  large  building  of  stone,  and  was  erected  by  the 
late  Lord  Uxbridge.  Excepting  the  castle,  there  are  no  public  buildings  that  deserve 
notice.  The  town  is  governed  by  a  mayor,  one  alderman,  two  bailiffs,  and  two  sergeants 
at  mace,  and,  together  with  the  contributory  boroughs  of  Pwllheli,  Nefyn,  and  Crickaeth, 
returns  a  member  to  parliament. 

The  castle  fills  up  nearly  the  whole  of  the  southern  front  of  the  town,  and  on  one 
side  is  bounded  immediately  by  the  Menai,  and  on  another  by  the  estuary  of  the  river 
Seiont.  It  is  not  more  distinguished  from  every  other  castle  that  I  have  yet  had  to  notice 
by  its  vastness,  than  by  the  beauty  and  taste  of  its  architecture.  Here  are  no  heavy 
rounders :  some  of  the  towers  are  of  enormous  circumference,  but  their  height  and  the 
sharpness  of  their  forms  take  from  them  all  appearance  of  clumsiness.  Some  of  them  are 
pentagonal,  some  hexagonal,  and  the  largest  octagonal.  Several  of  them  are  crowned 
with  slender  and  lofty  turrets,  which  contribute  to  give  the  whole  building  an  effect  of 
great  lightness  and  elegance.  The  general  form  of  the  castle  is  an  oblong  square,  but 
somewhat  irregular:  it  encloses  an  area  of  two  acres  and  a  half.  The  chief  entrance 
under  an  immense  tower  is  strikingly  grand  ;  over  the  gateway  is  the  mutilated  figure  of  a 
Avarrior  with  his  hand  on  a  half  drawn  sword,  supposed  to  represent  the  founder,  Edward 
the  First.  This  gateway  was  defended  by  four  portcullises.  On  entering  the  inner  court, 
the  building  around  you  appears  all  a  ruin,  nothing  remaining  but  the  shells  of  the  towers 
and  the  walls  which  connect  them.  The  stair-cases  are  all  destroyed  except  in  the  eagle 
tower,  which  is  the  largest,  and  distinguished  by  three  beautiful  turrets.  It  has  its  name 
from  the  figure  of  an  eagle  on  its  battlements,  which  antiquaries  have  supposed  to  be  of 
Roman  workmanship,  and  to  have  been  taken  by  Edward  from  the  neighbouring  ruins  of 
Segontium  *.  The  state  apartments  were  in  this  tower,  and  in  one  of  them  Edward  the 
Second  was  born.  At  the  opposite  end  of  the  court  is  the  queen's  gate,  through  which, 
according  to  tradition,  Eleanor  entered,  after  travelling  from  England  in  the  depth  of 

*  Pennant. 

winter, 


182  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

winter,  and  just  in  time  to  give  the  Welsh  a  baby  born  in  Wales  for  their  prince.  The 
base  or'  this  gateway  is  several  yards  above  the  ground  without  the  walls,  and  must  once 
have  been  furnished  with  a  draw-bridge. 

The  history  of  the  various  Welsh  castles  that  we  met  with,  has  led  me  through  a  kind  of 
regular  drama,  long  in  bringing  its  plot  to  perfection,  but  with  very  little  diversity  in  its 
incidents  or  characters.  On  entering  the  most  southern  and  accessible  quarter  of  Wales,  all 
the  castles  that  we  saw  were  memorials  of  some  of  the  earliest  conquests  made  in  the  coun- 
try; as  we  proceeded  northwards  they  marked  the  advancing  strides  of  the  usurpers;  but  we 
were  now  hemmed  in  by  the  fastnesses  of  the  mountains,  where  liberty  among  her  strongest 
holds  made  her  last  desperate  stand,  and  here  every  remaining  fortress  is  a  badge  of  her  final 
subjection.  There  is  no  part  of  the  Welsh  history  that  so  powerfully  rouses  the  feelings  as  this 
concluding  scene,  in  which  a  small  band  united  under  a  brave  and  just  prince,  scarcely  with 
the  hope  of  rescuing  their  long-persecuted  country,  but  with  the  resolution  to  perish  in  the 
attempt.  There  was  a  moderation  combined  with  the  valour  of  Llewelyn,  and  a  con- 
sistent principle  and  patriotism  in  his  resistance  to  his  oppressors,  that  give  a  dignity  to 
his  cause,  which  does  not  belong  to  the  wild  and  precarious  starts  of  resentment  in  most  of 
the  former  princes  of  the  country.  It  Avas  immediately  after  his  death  in  128'2,  that 
Edward  erected  this  castle  of  Caernarvon  as  a  check  upon  his  new  subjects,  who,  though 
dispirited  by  their  late  defeat  and  the  loss  of  their  leader,  were  by  no  means  disposed  to 
submit  with  patience  to  their  conquerors.  The  king  by  the  statute  of  Rhuddlan  made 
various  salutary  provisions  for  the  government  of  the  country,  but  he  could  not  conciliate 
the  good  will  of  the  people,  who  "  having  experience  of  the  government  of  the  English, 
and  knowing  that  the  king  would  rule  the  country  by  his  deputies,"  declared  that  the}' 
would  not  bear  an  Englishman  for  their  ruler,  but  were  content  to  receive  any  man  for 
their  prince  whom  his  majesty  might  please  to  name,  provided  that  he  were  a  Welshman. 
"  Whereupon  the  king  sent  for  Queene  Eleanor  out  of  England  in  thedeepe  of  winter, 
being  then  great  with  child,  to  the  castell  of  Caernarvon ;  and  when  she  was  nigh  to  be 
brought  to  bed,  the  king  went  to  Ruthlan,  and  sent  for  all  the  barons  and  best  men  in  all 
Wales  to  come  to  him,  to  consult  concerning  the  weale  publike  of  their  country.  And 
when  they  were  come  he  deferred  the  consultation  until  he  was  certified  that  the  queene 
was  delivered  of  a  sonne :  then  (sending  certeine  lords  to  the  christning  of  his  child,  and 
informing  them  how  he  would  have  him  named)  he  called  the  Welshmen  together,  declar- 
ing unto  them,  that  whereas  they  were  oftentimes  suitors  unto  him,  to  appoint  them  a 
prince,  he  now,  having  occasion  to  depart  out  of  the  countrie,  would  name  them  a  prince, 
if  they  would  allow  and  obey  him  whom  he  should  name.  To  the  which  motion  they 
answered,  that  they  would  so  doo,  if  he  would  appoint  one  of  their  own  nation  to  be  their 
prince  :  whereunto  the  king  replied,  that  he  would  name  one  that  was  borne  in  Wales,  and 
could  speake  never  a  word  of  English ;  whose  life  and  conversation  no  man  was  able  to 

stainc. 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN".  183 

slaine.     And  when  they  all  had  granted  that  such  a  one  they  would  obey,  he  named  his 
own  sonne  Edward,  born  in  Caernarvon  Castell  a  few  daies  before*." 

This  paltry  and  dishonest  trick  made  but  little  impression  on  the  gratitude  of  the  Welsh, 
and  their  indignation  and  heart-burnings  soon  burst  out  into  open  revolt.  In  the  year 
1293  an  armed  force,  headed  by  Madoc,  a  relation  to  Prince  Llewetyn,  suddenly  attacked 
the  English  at  Caernarvon,  who  were  keeping  a  fair  there,  and  after  massacring  the  people, 
got  possession  of  the  castle  and  plundered  the  town.  Edward,  on  the  news  of  this  insur- 
rection, recalled  the  Earls  of  Lancaster  and  Lincoln,  who  were  preparing  to  pass  over 
with  an  army  into  Gascony,  and  ordered  them  into  Wales.  They  were  met  by  the 
insurgents  near  Denbigh,  and  driven  back  with  great  loss.  The  king  then  entered  Wales 
in  person;  but,  in  his  progress  into  the  country,  the  Welsh  annoyed  him  by  desultory 
attacks,  and  cut  off  his  provisions,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  live  upon  very  gross  and 
coarse  food,  and  might  have  been  reduced  to  a  very  perilous  state,  had  he  not  been 
speedily  relieved  by  reinforcements.  The  rebellion,  however,  was  soon  completely  sup- 
pressed ;  and  the  king,  with  a  view  to  prevent  its  recurrence,  where  the  people  were  most 
inclined  to  disaffection,  and  where  the  nature  of  the  country  gave  them  the  greatest 
facility  of  rebelling,  erected  another  large  fortress  at  Beaumaris,  on  the  opposite  coast  of 
Anglesey  -j-. 

Caernarvon  castle  remained  unmolested  from  this  period  till  the  reign  of  Charles  the 
First,  when  it  was  taken,  in  l6'44,  by  the  forces  of  the  Parliament  under  Captain  Swanly,  to- 
gether with  four  hundred  prisoners  and  a  large  quantity  of  ammunition,  and  other  valuable 
spoils.  The  royalists  soon  regained  possession  of  it;  but  in  1646  were  besieged  by  General 
Mytton,  and  surrendered  on  honourable  terms.  They  made  another  attempt  to  recover 
it  in  1648,  under  Sir  John  Owen  ;  but  hearing  that  a  body  of  troops  were  on  their  march 
to  relieve  the  place,  they  suddenly  withdrew  from  the  siege,  in  order  to  intercept  them, 
and,  giving  them  battle,  were  totally  defeated.  Soon  after  this  event  the  whole  of  Nortli 
Wales  submitted  to  the  Parliament.  None  of  the  castles  in  Wales  that  were  garrisoned 
during  the  civil  war,  by  whichever  party  they  were  held,  made  any  effectual  resistance  to 
the  attacks  of  besiegers :  as  they  were  all  built  before  the  use  of  gunpowder,  they  were 
not,  I  suppose,  sufficiently  defended  by  outworks  to  resist  the  impression  of  artillery. 
Many  of  them,  indeed,  are  completely  commanded  by  heights  within  pistol-shot. 

After  our  survey  of  the  castle,  we  were  immediately  ferried  over  to  the  Anglesey 
shore,  as  my  friend  conceived  that  the  building  would  be  seen  in  the  most  picturesque 
point  of  view,  when  set  off  by  the  mountains  in  the  back  ground.  The  day  was  bright  and 
calm,  and  every  feature  of  the  scenery  appeared  to  the  utmost  advantage.  The  sun  shone 
upon  the  light  grey  towers  of  the  castle,  and  showed  it  in  all  its  splendour — imposing 
from  its  vastness,  but  graceful  and  beautiful  in  all  its  proportions.  The  Menai  in  front,  as 

*  Powel,  p.  275.  t  Ibid.  p.  219. 

n  B  smooth 


184  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

smooth  as  a  mirror,  and  chequered  with  vessels,  some  at  anchor,  and  some  gliding  by, 
swiftly  but  silently,  with  the  tide;  and  the  mountains  in  the  back  ground,,  with  all  their 
gulphs  and  precipices  distinctly  made  out,  composed,  together  with  this  magnificent 
building,  a  scene  of  mingled  grandeur  and  elegance,  that  we  had  not  seen  equalled  in  any 
other  part  of  Wales. 

There  are  no  manufactories  at  Caernarvon ;  but  the  business  of  the  port  is  extensive, 
though.not  very  various.  The  exports  consist  principally  of  slates,  Avhich  are  procured 
from  a  quarry  about  seven  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  town,  and  sent  in  very  large 
quantities  to  Liverpool,  Bristol,  London  and  Dublin.  The  copper  ore  from  the  Snowdon 
and  Llanberis  mines  is  shipped  here  for  the  founderies  at  Swansea ;  but  the  quantity  is 
not  considerable,  and  the  ore  is  said  to  be  much  inferior  to  that  of  Anglesey.  The  im- 
ports are  coals,  groceries,  and  other  necessaries  for  the  use  of  the  place  and  its  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Before  we  took  our  final  leave  of  this  toAvn  we  made  an  excursion  to  Snowdon,  an 
object  of  such  interest  and  notoriety  in  the  scenery  of  North  Wales,  that  it  would  have 
betrayed  a  want  of  all  decent  curiosity  to  have  passed  it  unexplored.  But  the  weather 
unluckily  proved  very  unfavourable,  and  we  toiled  up  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain 
with  no  other  reward  but  that  of  sitting  there  for  an  hour  or  two  in  a  dense,  cold 
mist.  In  the  evening  the  clouds  dispersed,  and  the  mountains  appeared  perfectly  clear; 
but  we  were  then  at  Caernarvon. 

We  determined  to  proceed  from  hence  to  Bangor  Ferry,  and  cross  over  Anglesey  by 
the  inland  road  to  Holyhead,  instead  of  going  thither  by  the  southwest  coast  of  the 
island,  which  offers  nothing  so  much  worth  the  curiosity  of  a  traveller  as  to  compensate 
for  the  annoyances  of  bad  roads  and  ill-provided  inns.  It  is  uniformly  lo\v,  <without  a 
spot  of  picturesque  scenery,  and  with  neither  town  nor  harbour  to  furnish  subject  for 
observation  or  description.  The  shore  is  sandy,  and  indented  by  frequent  inlets,  the 
estuaries  of  small  rivers.  There  is  a  general  declivity  from  the  northeast  side  of  the 
island  to  the  southwest,  so  that  most  of  its  rivers  join  the  sea  on  this  coast.  They  all  open 
into  wide  channels  at  their  mouths,  formed  by  the  spreading  of  the  sea  over  the  flat 
ground  on  each  side ;  but  by  the  gradual  accretion  of  sand  brought  down  in  their  course, 
these  channels  have  been  nearly  filled  up,  and  the  whole  shore  has  become  so  obstructed 
by  banks,  that  none  but  the  smallest  vessels  can  approach  it.  A  considerable  extent 
of  marshy  ground  around  Malltraeth,  the  largest  inlet,  has  lately  been  drained  and  secured 
against  the  sea  by  embankments*;  but  while  land  is  thus  recovered  from  the  water  in  one 

*  Since  writing  my  account  of  the  great  embankment  across  the  Traeth  Mawr,  I  have  been  informed,  that  in  an 
extraordinarily  high  tide,  the  sea  lately  burst  through  the  wall  in  several  places,  and  injured  it  very  materially.  This 
sudden  calamity  has  happened  under  very  desperate  circumstances:  so  vast  a  sum  of  money  has  already  been  sunk  in 
the  undertaking,  that  there  are  no  funds  left  to  cover  the  expenses  of  repairs,  and  very  substantial  repairs  are  necessary 
in  order  to  save  the  work  from  total  destruction. 

quarter, 


VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  18.5 

quarter,  it  is  exposed  to  an  enemy  equally  destructive  in  others.  The  country  adjoining 
the  coast  is  perfectly  flat,  and  the  sand,  which  is  forced  up  into  ridges  along  the  shore 
by  the  sea,  is  scattered  by  the  strong  southwest  gales  over  the  inland  plains,  to  the  utter 
destruction  of  all  vegetation.  A  large  tract  of  land,  called  Llanddwyn,  lying  between 
the  Menai  and  Malltraeth,  has  been  reduced  to  a  desart  by  these  means.  In  the  time  of 
Henry  VIII.  this  was  one  of  the  richest  prebends  of  the  cathedral  of  Bangor,  though  it 
did  not  derive  its  wealth  from  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  but  the  offerings  of  pilgrims  to 
crosses,  holy  wells,  relics,  and  other  sacred  furniture,  imported  or  sanctified  by  the  disin- 
terested priests  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  Aberfraw,  a  poor  village  a  few  miles  north 
of  Malltraeth,  was>  from  a  remote  antiquity,  till  the  final  subjection  of  Wales,  the  chief 
residence  of  the  Welsh  Princes ;  but  there  is  not  a  vestige  of  their  palace,  nor  of  any  build- 
ings connected  with  it,  remaining.  There  is,  indeed,  a  dubious  belief,  that  a  few  stones, 
forming  part  of  an  old  barn,  have  seen  better  days ;  but  if  their  identity  was  more 
completely  established,  who  would  travel  out  of  his  way  merely  to  witness  their  de- 
gradation ? 

We  hired  a  boat  at  Caernarvon  to  take  us  to  Bangor  Ferry,  that  we  might  view 
the  scenery  of  the  Menai  to  the  greatest  advantage.  Its  coasts  combine  a  great  variety 
in  their  form  and  embellishments  :  from  the  entrance  of  the  strait  to  Caernarvon,  they  are 
flat  and  naked  ;  but  they  improve  as  you  advance  further  to  the  north,  and  about  three  miles 
above  the  castle,  Avhere  the  stream  becomes  scarcely  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  the  scene 
loses  all  character  of  the  sea-coast,  and  is  softened  into  all  the  beauty  and  elegance  of  the 
Thames  at  Richmond.  The  Caernarvonshire  side  is  the  most  elevated,  and  is  diversified 
by  woods  and  meadows ;  but  the  shore  of  Anglesey  is  bordered  by  nearly  one  continued 
grove.  This  side  is  further  set  off  by  several  handsome  villas,  among  which  Plas 
Newydd,  the  seat  of  Lord  Uxbridge,  is  most  conspicuous.  Nothing  can  be  more  de- 
lightful than  the  situation  of  this  house ;  standing  in  the  midst  of  highly  ornamented 
grounds,  with  the  Menai  in  front*  and  commanding  a  full  view  of  the  sublimest  moun- 
tains of  Caernarvonshire.  The  Menai  has  the  character  of  a  fine  river,  but  has  a  distin- 
guishing beauty  in  the  brilliancy  and  varying  hues  of  green  and  blue,  that  are  peculiar  to 
the  water  of  the  sea.  It  is  only  for  an  extent  of  about  five  or  six  miles  that  its  coasts  are 
decorated  as  I  have  described  :  beyond  the  grounds  of  Plas  Newydd,  on  the  Anglesey 
side,  it  is  bounded  by  naked  rocks,  and  all  that  is  seen  of  the  inland  country  is  barren 
and  dreary.  On  the  opposite  side  the  change  is  not  so  remarkable,  but  the  coast  becomes 
rough  and  rude,  till  at  Bangor  Ferry  it  is  again  trimmed  and  embellished  by  cultivation. 

The  Menai  has  been  the  scene  of  several  memorable  events  in  the  history  of  the 
country.  The  place  where  Suetonius  Paulinus  passed  over  with  his  army  is  supposed  to 
be  between  Llanvair  point  and  the  church  of  Llanidan,  about  four  miles  to  the  north- 
ward of  Caernarvon.  There  is  an  interest  in  knowing  and  seeing  the  exact  spot ;  but 
there  is  no  authority  for  pronouncing  this  to  be  it,  except  that  it  is  at  present  the  easiest 

B  B  2  ford, 


1SG  VOYAGE    UOUNf)    GUKAT    UllITAIX. 

ford,  and  this  reason  will  equally  apply  to  the  subsequent  passage  of  Agricola.  There 
are  places,  however,  near  Llanidan,  whose  names,  having  survived  the  lapse  of  nearly 
eighteen  centuries,  have  been  supposed  to  determine  the  very  ground  where  the  Britons 
were  drawn  up,  and  they  stood,  we  know,  opposite  to  their  invaders.  At  a  short  distance 
from  the  water-side,  there  is  a  large  field,  called  Macs  Mawr  Gad,  "  The  Great  Army's 
Field ;"  and  a  little  to  the  east  of  it,  close  to  the  shore,  is  a  place  called  the  Rhiedd, 
"  The  chief  Men's  Post*."  In  a  country,  indeed,  so  often  the  seat  of  war  as  Wales,  these 
places  may  have  been  a  field  of  battle  many  ages  after  the  coming  of  Suetonius ;  and  as 
all  invaders  of  Anglesey  were  equally  interested  in  finding  out  the  safest  ford,  this  Maes 
Mawr  Gad,  though  not  improbably  the  spot  where  the  Britons,  surrounded  by  their 
raving  Druids,  stood  opposed  to  the  Romans,  may  have  received  its  name  on  a  much, 
later  occasion. 

There  are  no  Roman  remains  in  this  part  of  the  island,  but  many  of  those  rude  mo- 
numents that  are  attributed  to  the  Druids,,  and  these  have  been  already  very  regularly 
methodised,  and  elaborately  explained,  leaving  us  nothing  to  regret,  but  that  there  is  not 
a  single  authentic  record  to  vouch  for  the  correctness  of  the  exposition-f-.  They  are 
mostly  in  ruins ;  but  in  the  grounds  of  Plas  Newydd  there  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most 
perfect  cromlechs  in  Wales.  The  table-stone  is  twelve  feet  seven  inches  long,  twelve  feet 
broad,  and  four  thick,  and  rests  upon  five  tall  columnar  stones.  There  is  another  cromlech 
barely  separated  from  it,  but  of  much  smaller  dimensions.  The  preservation  of  a  monu- 
ment like  this,  on  the  very  ground  Avhere  the  Druids  were  cast  into  their  own  fires,  where 
their  groves  were  cut  down,  and  all  the  machinery  of  their  superstition  overwhelmed  in 
one  common  ruin,  is  a  strong  proof,  among  others,  that  these  cromlechs  were  not  their 
altars.  Such  an  object,  with  the  fire  still  burning  upon  it,  and  stained  with  the  blood  of 
the  victims,  would  certainly  have  been  too  conspicuous  an  object  to  have  escaped  the 
observation  and  the  fury  of  the  Romans,  who  shewed  the  Druids  no  mere}',  and  were  de- 
termined to  hurl  down  ever}'  memorial  of  their  horrible  superstition.  It  is  more  than  im- 
probable, indeed,  that  it  was  connected  in  any  way  with  their  religious  worship :  it  could 
not  have  escaped  notice,  even  without  the  addition  of  fire;  and,  standing  within  the  pre- 
cincts of  their  savage  rites,  would  not  have  been  spared  by  the  Romans,  had  they  not 
been  assured  that  it  was  not  an  instrument  of  that  superstition  which  it  was  their  object 
to  exterminate.  Cromlechs  are  common  in  other  parts  of  England  and  Wales,  into 
which  they  had  previously  penetrated,  and  they  had,  therefore,  had  opportunities  of  be- 
coming familiar  with  their  form,  and  the  intention  of  their  construction,  or  at  least  of 
ascertaining  that  they  made  no  part  of  the  institutions  of  Druidism. 

Reasonable  doubts  may  be  brought  forward  on  the  subject  of  various  other  monu- 
ments, which,  without  any  positive  authority,  have  been  crowded  into  the  establish- 

*  Rowland's  Mona.  Antiqur,  Kestauratn,  p.  86.  t Ibid-  passim. 

ment 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  187 

ment  of  Druidical  superstition.     Ancient  historians  mention  no  temples  of  the  Druids 
but  their  groves,  and  these  are  so  invariably  included  in  every  notice  of  their  form? 
of  worship,   that  if  they  did  not  constitute  the  entire  frame-work,  we  must  suppose 
that  they  were  an  indispensable  part  of  it ;  yet  these  stone  monuments  are  very  often 
found  on  the  tops  of  rocky  mountains,  where  trees  could  never  grow.     They  are  too 
numerous  also,  and  too  widely  scattered  over  every  part  of  the  country,  to  be  adjudged 
Druidical.     Whatever  was  the  extent  of  their  authority,  we  have  no  evidence  for  believ- 
ing, that  the  rites  of  the  Druid  were  solemnized,  or  their  members  established  in  bodies, 
in  every  quarter  of  the  island.     There  is  reason  rather  for  thinking,  that  they  were  con- 
fined within  a  small  compass;  for  the  Romans  did  not  discover  them  till  they  came 
suddenly  upon  them  on  the  borders  of  Anglesey.     It  may  be  urged  that  they  may  have 
retreated  before  the  invaders,  and  fled  from  all  corners  to  a  point  for  safety ;  but  Tacitus, 
in  his  description  of  the  battle,  or  rather  massacre,  in  Mona,  does  not  particularly  advert 
to  their  numbers,  which  he  would  scarcely  have  omitted  to  do,  had  they  been  represented 
to  him  as  a  vast  multitude.     Besides,  they  might  have  retreated  still  further;  they  might 
have  fled  in  their  coracles  to  the  Isle  of  Man  or  to  Ireland :  but  here  they  stood,  as  if 
alarmed  for  the  first  time,  and  invoked  the  intercession  of  their  Gods  for  their  protec- 
tion.    If  they  had  been  driven  from  other  groves,  temples,  and  altars,  their  superstitious 
confidence  must  have  been  destroyed ;  on  the  contrary,  they  waited  here  for  the  attack 
of  their  enemies,  and  hoped,  by  human  sacrifices,  and  dire  imprecations,  to  save  their 
sanctuary  from  injury  and  violation.    They  may  have  had  an  extended  influence  over  the 
country;   but  here  appears  to  have  been  their  seat,  from  whence  all  their  laws  were 
transmitted,  and  where  all  the  solemnities  of  their  superstition  were  celebrated  in  one. 
mysterious  grove.     If  their  temples  and  altars  were  of  stone,  we  must  pronounce,  judging 
from  the  magnitude  of  their  works,  and  the  ait  and  labour  employed  in  their  construc- 
tion, that  Wiltshire,  and  not  Anglesey,  was  their  principal  seat.     But  the  Romans  had 
overrun  this  part  of  the  island  before  they  entered  North  Wales,  and  Stonehenge,  the  most 
astonishiii2;  structure  that  exists  of  all  those  which  are  included  in  the  long  catalogue  of 

O  O  O 

Druidical  remains,  now  stands  undestroyed  within  a  few  miles  of  a  Roman  station.  If 
the  Druids  had  had  a  settlement  here,  if  this  had  been  the  grand  scene  of  their  most 
solemn  ceremonies,  the  Romans  must  have  become  acquainted  with  them  :  we  cannot 
fairly  say  that  they  fled  before  their  enemies ;  they  would  have  had  as  much  interest  in 
defending  this  vast  sanctuary,  and  as  much  hope  of  defending  it  successfully,  as  their  seat 
in  Anglesey;  and  if  they  feared  to  trust  to  their  gods  here,  they  would  not  ultimately  have 
made  a  stand  when  they  might  have  fled  further.  On  the  whole,  it  appears  to  me, 
relying  entirely  on  the  sparing  notices  of  Roman  writers  concerning  the  British  Druids, 
the  only  certain  evidence  on  the  subject,  that  whatever  were  their  numbers,  and  wherever 
their  settlements,  they  had  no  concern  with  these  cromlechs,  and  other  stone  monuments 
which  were  unregarded  by  the  Romans,  though  they  were  thickly  scattered  in  their 

way. 


18S  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

way.  To  attempt  to  undermine  one  theory  for  any  purpose  but  that  of  building  up 
another  in  its  place,  is  unusual ;  but  I  really  have  not  boldness  enough  to  raise  any  other 
than  a  negative  voice  on  the  subject. 

We  loitered  so  long  under  the  regenerated  groves  of  Plas  Newydd,  that  the  tide  came 
down  against  us,  and  obliged  us  to  land  before  we  reached  our  port.  In  this  narrow  part 
of  the  channel,  which  is  obstructed  by  numerous  rocks,  it  is  impossible  to  make  head 
against  the  tide,  when  at  its  full  strength.  About  half  a  mile  below  Bangor  Ferry  are  the 
frightful  passes  of  the  Swelly,  lying  between  three  large  rocks,  which  stand  at  intervals 
in  a  direct  line  across  the  strait.  The  stream  races  through  these  narrow  sounds  with 
amazing  impetuosity,  boiling  and  wheeling  round  in  whirlpools,  and,  when  opposed  by 
a  strong  wind,  curling  up  in  short,  sudden  waves,  which  break  as  they  fall.  During  high 
spring  tides  the  current  here  runs  at  the  prodigious  rate  of  nine  miles  an  hour.  The 
strait  at  this  point  is  not  more  than  five  hundred  yards  in  breadth,  and  the  three  rocks 
occupy  nearly  half  of  that  space.  The  distance  between  the  Caernarvonshire  shore  and 
the  first  rock,  called  the  Swelly,  is  one  hundred  and  seventy  feet,  and  between  that  and 
Penlas,  the  middle  one,  two  hundred  and  forty  feet.  The  intervals  between  these  two 
are  the  only  channels  that  are  navigable  with  any  degree  of  safety ;  the  space  between 
Penlas  and  Ynys  Well-tog,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  being  shallow,  and  rendered 
dangerous  by  several  intermediate  rocks.  The  Swelly  and  Penlas  are  just  covered  at 
high  water  with  spring  tides ;  but  a  large  mass  of  Ynys  Well-tog  is  always  seen,  and  a 
low  reef,  quite  dry  at  low  water,  stretches  out  from  its  base  to  within  a  few  yards  of  the 
Anglesey  shore.  The  Menai  would  be  an  invaluable  outlet  to  vessels  entangled  in  the 
deep  bays  into  which  the  strait  opens  at  each  extremity,  and  unable  to  fetch  into  the 
channel,  round  Holyhead  on  the  northwestern  coast  of  Anglesey,  or  round  Elian's  Point 
on  the  northeastern  coast;  but  the  Swelly  is  a  barrier  against  all  but  vessels  of  a 
small  class.  Sloops  from  sixteen  to  a  hundred  tons  can  work  their  passage  through  with 
any  wind,  if  the  weather  be  moderate;  but  the  attempt  could  not  be  made  in  a  square- 
rigged  vessel,  without  great  risk,  unless  the  wind  were  directly  fair;  and,  indeed,  vessels 
of  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  tons  very  rarely  pass  under  any  circumstances^  It  is 
not  only  the  force  of  the  regular  current  which  they  have  to  fear,  but  the  eddy  tides. 
The  stream  runs  straight  between  the  rocks;  but  in  a  line  with  them,  and  for  the  space 
of  about  a  hundred  feet  below  them,  there  is  always  a  refluent  and  rapid  tide  setting  im* 
mediately  upon  them.  The  coast  on  each  side  of  the  strait  is  high  and  steep,  so  that 
vessels  sailing  through  with  the  wind  off  either  shore  often  meet  with  partial  and  baffling 
airs,  which,  throwing  their  sails  into  disorder,  render  them  unmanageable*  and  sometimes 
force  them  into  the  eddy  tides.  Small  sloops  have  always  a  boat  alongside,  ready  to  tow 
them  ahead  if  the  wind  should  fail  or  thwart  them ;  but  a  boat  could  not  act  upon  a  vessel 
of  more  than  a  hundred  tons,  with  quickness  enough  to  meet  the  urgency  of  the  occasion. 
There  is  no  hope  of  saving  a  vessel  in  an  emergency  of  this  kind  by  coming  to  an  anchor ; 

for, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  18.9 

for,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground  all  round  the  Swelly,  as  well  as  the  force  of  the 
current,  no  anchor  will  hold  for  a  moment. 

The  general  motion  of  the  tides  in  the  Menai  is  singularly  perplexed.  The  tide 
setting  in  from  the  Western  Ocean,  is  divided  by  the  Isle  of  Anglesey  into  two  streams, 
one  of  which  passes  into  the  strait  at  its  southwestern  entrance,  and  the  Other,  flowing 
through  the  great  channel  between  Holyhead  and  the  coast  of  Ireland,  enters  it  by 
Beaumaris  bay.  At  full  and  change  of  the  moon  it  is  high  water  at  Caernarvon  bar  at 
nine  o'clock,  but  not  before  half  past  ten  at  Beaumaris,  the  first  stream  of  the  flood 
coming  to  Caernarvon  bar  an  hour  and  a  half  earlier  than  it  arrives  at  the  opposite 
extremity  of  the  strait.  The  earliest  tide,  after  passing  the  bar  and  the  numerous 
shoals  lying  between  it  and  Caernarvon,  rushes  up  the  channel  with  great  violence,  and 
meets  the  tide  at  Beaumaris,  which  has  flowed  by  a  circuitous  course  round  Anglesey. 
As  it  has  not  so  much  ground  to  move  over  by  at  least  two-thirds  as  this  opposing  tide,  it 
appears  singular  that  it  should  not  have  joined  it  earlier ;  but  the  delay  is  accounted  for 
by  the  numerous  obstructions  which  it  has  to  contend  with  in  the  first  part  of  its  passage. 
On  the  making  of  the  ebb  at  Caernarvon  bar,  the  current,  of  course,  changes  its  direction, 
and,  combining  with  the  flood  which  keeps  pouring  in  for  an  hour  and  a  half  at  Beau- 
maris, is  forced  through  the  Swelly  with  tremendous  violence.  At  length  the  ebb  at 
Beaumaris  coming  on,  the  lower  ebb  necessarily  slackens,  and  the  current  again  changes 
its  direction  near  Plas  Newydd,  and  runs  for  two  hours  towards  Beaumaris  before 
the  flood  again  conies  up  from  Caernarvon  to  the  Swelly.  The  ordinary  rise  of  spring 
tides  in  the  Menai  is  twenty  feet ;  but  with  certain  winds  they  reach  twenty-five  and 
sometimes  thirty  feet. 

A  little  above  the  Swelly  is  the  small  church  of  Llandyssilio,  which  is  remarkable 
only  for  the  preposterousness  of  its  situation.  It  stands  on  a  rock  projecting  from  the 
Anglesey  shore,  and  at  high  water  is  insulated ;  so  that  the  hours  of  service  must  be 
regulated  by  the  tide-table.  I  know  not  why  so  absurd  a  situation  was  selected,  though 
the  absurdity  seems  to  be  part  of  a  system  in  Anglesey,  in  which  most  of  the  churches  of 
its  seventy-four  parishes  are  noted  for  being  in  rude  places  near  the  sea-shore.  Llan- 
dyssilio is  dedicated  to  St.  Tyssilio  (perhaps  a  water  saint),  and  may  have  been  founded 
here  in  order  to  court  his  protection  for  seamen  through  the  dangerous  intricacies  of  the 
Swelly  rocks. 

A  few  minutes  walk  from  hence  brought  us  to  Bangor  Ferry,  where  there  is  a  com- 
fortable inn,  very  prettily  situated  on  a  grassy  and  well-wooded  bank,  sloping  with  a 
steep  descent  to  the  water.  The  cheerful  verdure  of  this  spot  forms  a  singular  contrast 
with  the  dreariness  of  the  opposite  coast,  which  is  all  naked  rock.  The  land  beyond  it  is 
almost  as  barren,  and  as  you  took  over  it  from  the  Caernarvonshire  side,  the  narrow 
stream  of  the  Menai  seems  like  the  boundary  of  two  different  climates.  About  half  a 

mile 


190  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

mile  higher  up  the  Anglesey  coast  again  assumes  a  new  front,  rising  in  a  steep  and  lofty 
bank,  diversified  with  rock  and  wood,  which  extends  nearly  to  Beaumaris. 

Bangor  Ferry  is  the  most  frequented  ferry  over  the  Menai,  being  in  the  track  of  the 
great  Dublin  road.     The  inconvenience  of  a  ferry  over  so  rapid  and  turbulent  a  stream, 
and  in  the  way  of  so  crowded  and  important  a  thoroughfare,  has  long  been  a  cause  of 
serious  complaint;  and  various  schemes  have  been  in  agitation,  from  time  to  time,  for 
remedying  the  annoyance  by  a  bridge.     In  the  }'ear  1785,  a  petition  on  the  subject  was 
first  presented  before  the  House  of  Commons,  and  plans  proposed  for  making  a  road  across 
the  strait,  either  by  a  wooden  bridge,  a  stone  bridge,  or  an  embankment.     But  all  these 
were  decidedly  objected  to ;  the  first  as  impracticable,  and,  if  otherwise,  not  sufficiently 
durable ;  the  next,  as  too  expensive,  and  also  impracticable  ;  and  the  last,  as  detrimental 
to  the  navigation  of  the  strait.     This  complete  failure  effectually  repressed  any  speedy 
re-action  of  spirit  and  speculation,  and  travellers  long  submitted  to  the  inconvenience  with 
the  more  patience  from  a  belief  that  it  was  irremediable.    At  length  the  matter  was  again 
brought  before  parliament,  in  the  session  of  1810,  and  a  committee  appointed  to  examine 
into  the  state  of  the  Holyhead  roads,  and  the  most  efficacious  means  of  improving  them. 
According  to  the  opinion  of  the  ablest  engineers  of  the  present  day,  there  are  but  two  places 
on  the  Menai  where  bridges  could  be  safely  constructed.  One  is  about  a  hundred  and  thirty 
yards  below  the  ferry,  where,  by  the  projection  of  the  Anglesey  coast,  and  a  small  island  of 
rock  called  Ynys  y  Moch,  in  advance  of  it,  the  channel  is  rendered  considerably  narrower 
than  in  any  other  part  of  the  strait.  The  space  between  the  island  and  the  Caernarvonshire 
shore  is  only  four  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  and  over  this  it  is  considered  perfectly  practicable 
to  throw  a  single  arch.     The  banks  on  both  sides  are  high,  steep,  and  firm,  and  thus  well 
adapted  for  the  approaches,  and  for  supporting  the  abutments  against  the  pressure  of  the 
arch.     The  other  place  is  across  the  Swelly,  where  the  channel  is  nearly  five  hundred 
yards  in  breadth,  but  where  the  rocks  are  so  singularly  fitted  by  their  size,  shape,  and 
relative  positions,  for  the  foundation  of  piers,  that  few  people  perhaps  ever  looked  at 
them  without  thinking  of  a  bridge.    Plans  of  bridges  for  both  these  places  Avere  presented 
by  Mr.  Rennie,  with  arches  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  height,  from  the  crown  to  the 
surface  of  the  water  at  high  tide,  under  which  vessels  of  three  hundred  tons  might  pass, 
with  all  their  masts  standing.     Over  the  Swelly  it  was  proposed  to  throw  three  cast-iron 
arches,  each  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet  span,  and  springing  from  four  piers,  each 
seventy-five  feet  thick.     Land  arches  were  to  extend  from  the  pier  on  the  Caernarvon- 
shire side  to  the  distance  of  about  two  hundred  yards,  and  from  the  pier  on  Ynys  Well- 
tog  to  the  distance  of  four  hundred  and  thirty-four  yards,  making  the  whole  length  one 
thousand  and  sevent3r-six  yards.     The  land  arches  on  each  side  were  to  have  wing  walls 
at  their  termination,  and  embankments  of  earth  for  the  approaches :  the  breadth  of  the 
road-way  was  to  be  thirty-two  feet.    The  expense  of  this  colossal  work  was  estimated  at 

29CW7/. 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  191 

290,4 171.  Mr.  Rennie  considered  that  it  would  be  a  secure  and  permanent  structure, 
and  the  design  was  consequently  approved  of,  though  not  fated  to  be  carried  into  exe- 
cution. 

Shortly  after  the  committee  had  presented  their  report,  Mr.  Telford,  the  engineer, 
having  received  directions  to  devise  the  best  means  of  making  a  road  over  the  Menai, 
proposed  to  a  second  committee  plans  of  bridges  over  the  same  parts  of  the  channel  that 
had  been  chosen  by  Mr.  Rennie,  but  at  a  vast  saving  of  expense.  The  immense  height 
of  the  arches  proposed  by  Mr.  Rennie>  with  a  view  to  give  a  free  passage  to  ships  of  three 
hundred  tons,  was  found  to  be  unnecessary ;  for,  on  fuller  investigation,  it  proved  that 
two  ships  of  that  burden  had  not  sailed  through  the  Menai  during  a  period  of  twenty 
years,  and  that  the  average  number  of  vessels  which  navigated  the  strait  was  considerably 
below  one  hundred  tons.  Bridges,  therefore,  may  be  built  of  much  lighter  construction, 
and  consequently  of  less  expense.  Mr.  Telford's  design  for  the  Swelly  has  five  arches  :  a 
central  one  of  two  hundred  and  sixty  feet  span,  over  the  space  between  the  Swelly  rock 
and  Penlas ;  an  arch  on  each  side  of  it  of  one  hundred  feet,  just  covering  the  two  rocks ; 
and  an  arch  at  each  extremity  of  the  same  span  as  the  central  one.  The  height  of  the 
arches  between  the  lower  part  of  the  crown  and  the  line  of  high  water  is  ninety  feet, 
which  is  several  feet  above  the  highest  mast  of  a  vessel  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  tons. 
The  large  arches  are  elliptical  and  of  cast-iron,  but  the  small  ones  are  semicircular  and  of 
stone,  in  order  to  add  weight  and  stability  to  the  piers,  which  are  thirty  feet  thick.  From 
the  extremities  of  the  abutments,  after  building  rubble  walls  above  the  level  of  the  tide- 
way, it  is  proposed  to  carry  out  embankments  until  the  road-way  reaches  the  natural 
ground.  The  breadth  of  the  road-way  is  thirty-two  feet.  From  minute  calculations  it 
appears  that  the  expense  of  erecting  the  whole  amounts  to  158,698/. 

In  the  design  for  the  bridge  at  Ynys  y  Moch,  it  is  proposed  to  embrace  the  whole 
breadth  of  the  channel  with  a  single  cast-iron  arch  of  five  hundred  feet  span,  and  one 
hundred  feet  in  height;  the  expense  of  which  is  estimated  at  127,33U.  This  design  has 
a  material  advantage  over  that  for  the  Swelly,  in  leaving  the  navigation  of  the  channel 
perfectly  unimpedjed.  Mr.  Telford  gave  it  the  decided  preference  on  all  considerations, 
whether  of  economy,  practicability,  or  magnificence  in  effect,  and  it  was  fully  approved 
of  by  the  committee ;  but  whether  this  or  either  of  the  plans  is  likely  to  be  executed  I 
am  not  informed  *. 

Many  other  schemes  were  proposed  for  the  general  improvement  of  the  Holyhead 
roads,  leading  from  Shrewsbury  and  Chester,  which  were  proved  by  various  evidence,  not 
only  to  be  shamefully  out  of  repair,  but  laid  out  so  injudiciously,  and  with  so  bungling 
and  imperfect  an  attention  to  the  nature  of  the  mountainous  country  through  which  they  are 
carried,  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  make,  for  the  greater  part  of  the  distance,  entirely  new 

*  Reports  of  the  Committee  ou  the  Holyhead  Koud.s. 

C  C  lilies 


192  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

lines  of  road.  The  expense  of  the  whole  works,  including  a  bridge  over  the  Conway,  as 
well  as  over  the  Menai,  is  estimated  at  64S,435/.,  a  vast  sum,  indeed,  but  not  more  than 
proportioned  to  the  importance  of  the  object  in  view — the  establishment  of  a  free  and  safe 
communication  between  the  capitals  of  England  and  Ireland.  The  roads  at  present  are 
abominably  bad,  and  the  passage  of  the  ferries  is  always  inconvenient ;  and,  in  the  winter 
time,  exceedingly  disagreeable,  often  dangerous,  and  sometimes  impracticable.  About 
six  years  ago  twelve  people  were  drowned  in  crossing  over  the  Conway  in  the  mail-boat ; 
and,  a  few  weeks  afterwards,  some  passengers  were  reduced  to  a  most  perilous  situation, 
and  saved  with  great  difficulty  by  landing  on  a  small  island,  where  they  were  obliged  to 
remain  for  many  hours.  If  bridges  are  not  to  be  constructed,  more  trust-worthy  boats, 
at  least,  should  be  provided,  and  proper  regulations  made  and  enforced  for  the  limitation 
of  the  number  of  passengers  to  be  carried  over  at  a  time.  I  was  informed  by  people  who 
witnessed  the  accident  on  the  Conway,  that  it  could  not  have  happened  had  not  the  boat 
been  improperly  loaded.  The  mail-boat  usually  carries  only  the  coach-passengers,  which 
it  may  always  do  with  safety ;  but  the  common  ferry-boats  receive  as  many  as  can  be 
packed  in  them,  so  that  the  boatmen  can  scarcely  move  their  arms ;  and  in  case  of  any 
sudden  emergency,  are  quite  incapacitated  from  making  any  effective  exertions.  Mr. 
Bingley*  relates  a  miserable  story  of  the  wreck  of  the  Abermenai  ferry-boat,  the  lowest  on 
the  strait,  which  was  communicated  to  him  by  a  man  who  saved  himself  by  swimming, 
and  was  the  only  one  who  escaped  out  of  fifty-five  persons.  The  boat  had  started  from 
Caernarvon  at  an  improper  time  of  tide,  when  it  was  nearly  dark,  and  through  the  care- 
lessness or  mismanagement  of  the  boatmen,  grounded  on  a  sand-bank,  from  whence,  being 
so  heavily  laden,  no  exertions  could  remove  it.  It  was  soon  filled  with  water,  and  the 
wretched  crowd  of  men,  women,  and  children,  retreated  to  the  bank,  where  they  conti- 
nued shrieking  for  help  till  the  sea  closed  over  them. 

There  are  five  regular  ferries  over  the  Menai,  Avhich  were  formerly  the  property  of  the 
crown,  but  are  now  in  the  hands  of  private  individuals,  and  arc  all  equally  ill-regulated. 
The  fares  of  all  are  moderate  except  of  Bangor  ferry,  which,  being  in  the  way  of  the  richer 
Order  of  travellers,  is  supposed,  perhaps,  to  have  a  fair  privilege  of  extortion.  The  channel 
here  is  little  more  than  three  hundred  yards  across,  but  the  boatmen  exact  a  shilling  for 
each  coach-passenger,  and  then  demand  further  remuneration  for  carrying  his  trunk 
twenty  yards  to  the  coach,  and  delivering  it  into  the  hands  of  a  porter,  whom  he  must 
please  to  remember  before  he  finally  makes  his  escape.  I  know  not  who  is  the  proprietor 
of  this  ferry,  nor  whether  he  leases  it  out;  but,  as  he  has  some  benefit  in  it,  he  would  do 
little  more  than  his  duty  to  the  public  by  interfering  to  suppress  this  fraudulent  charge ; 
fraudulent,  I  venture  to  say,  seeing  that  it  is  six  times  more  than  at  the  ferry  above,  where 
the  channel  is  nearly  twice  as  broad. 

*   Excursions  through  North  Wales,  p.  193. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  193 

The  Welsh  name  of  Bangor  Ferry  is  Porth-aeth-wy,  signifying,  The  passage  which 
some  before  had  crossed  over.  In  so  thronged  a  thoroughfare,  the  reader,  I  fear,  will 
scarcely  guess  who  these  individuals  were,  whose  passage  is  thus  particularly  adverted  to. 
It  seems,  according  to  a  learned  author  and  antiquary,  that  they  were  a  party  of  tra- 
vellers from  Babel,  who,  on  the  general  dispersion,  proceeded  direct  to  Bangor  Ferry,  and 
immediately  crossed  over  to  Anglesey.  Now  there  happened  to  be  another  party  bound 
to  the  same  goal,  not  far  behind  them,  who,  on  their  arrival  at  the  border  of  the  Menai, 
wished  to  profit  by  the  experience  of  their  precursors,  and  therefore  very  naturally  en- 
quired for  Porth-aeth-wy  * ;  and,  to  this  day,  this  is  the  familiar  name  of  the  ferry  among 
the  Welsh,  though  not  many  of  them,  perhaps,  have  ever  penetrated  through  the  dark 
mazes  of  its  etymology.  With  the  discoverer  of  these  hidden  truths  they  were  but  mat- 
ters of  yesterday ;  for  in  working  out  the  history  of  '  Mona  Antiqua,'  he  begins  from 
Chaos.  Whom  this  second  party  from  Babel  found  to  answer  their  immortal  question,  he 
does  not  unfold ;  but,  possibly,  there  may  have  been  some  stragglers  from  the  first  divi- 
sion, who,  fatigued  by  their  long  and  arduous  journey,  resolved  to  go  no  further  than  to 
the  Caernarvonshire  border  of  the  strait,  and  were  there  in  readiness  to  pilot  their  fol- 
lowers. We  are  favoured  with  a  few  more  facts  concerning  the  conduct  of  these  abo- 
rigines, evolved  from  such  evidence  as  the  lapse  of  ages  has  left  us,  and  which  will  not  be 
altogether  despised  by  those  who  have  a  respect  for  the  general  system  of  Celtic  archai- 
ology.  On  their  arrival  in  Anglesey  they  took  possession,  it  appears,  of  some  hillocks  not 
far  from  the  water-side,  and  made  holes  for  their  habitations,  the  traces  of  which  are  still 
visible,  at  least  they  were  reported  to  be  so  a  century  ago ;  and  I  presume  that  a  century 
could  make  but  little  impression  on  materials  of  such  approved  hardihood.  They  selected 
these  eminences  for  their  places  of  abode  because  the  lower  grounds  were  covered  with 
woods,  and  infested  by  wild  beasts.  The  existence  of  the  latter  is  proved  by  the  sur- 
viving names  of  the  places  where  they  dwelt ;  such  as,  '  Cors-y-Bleiddian,  The  Wolves' 
Den;  Cors-y-Wiber,  the  Serpents'  Den;  Bodlew,  the  Lions'  Den;  and  Llas*lew,  the  Place 
where  a  Lion  was  killed.'  The  author  from  whom  I  am  gleaning  these  particulars  has  not 
been  very  precise  in  his  topography ;  and  some  of  my  Welsh  friends,  by  no  means  strangers 
to  Anglesey,  have  candidly  acknowledged  to  me,  that  they  never  could  discover  the  places 
to  which  he  alludes,  though  he  himself  seems  to  have  hunted  them  down  by  the  strong 
scent  of  their  every-day  names.  He  provides  against  the  stare  which  some  individuals  of 
his  menagerie  are  likely  to  occasion,  and  particularly  the  lion,  by  observing,  that  we  have 
no  right  to  conclude,  because  that  animal  is  not  at  present  a  native  of  Anglesey,  that  he 
never  has  been  at  any  period  since  the  flood:  we  find  the  remains  of  elephants  in  Britain, 
and,  surely,  we  cannot  think  that  the  prince  of  beasts  was  excluded -f-.  It  may  be  averred, 
however,  against  this  artful  apology,  that  the  climate  of  Britain  (not  utterly  changed,  I 

*  Rowland's  Mona  Antiq.  Restaur.  p.  23.  t  Ibid.  p.  85. 

c  c  2  imagine, 


194  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

imagine,  since  the  deluge),  would  have  excluded  both  elephants  and  lions,  and  that  if  they 
ever  lived  here,  the  causes  which  extirpated  them  changed  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
spared  neither  their  dens,  nor  the  names  of  their  dens.  But  an  antiquary,  perhaps,  may, 
on  some  occasions,  claim  the  licence  of  a  poet,  and  place  lions  in  Anglesey  as  Cowper 
planted  sensitive  plants  among  the  oysters,  not  because  they  ever  grew  there,  but 
because 


a  poet's  muse  is 


To  make  them  grow  just  where  she  chooses. 

The  interior  of  Anglesey  is,  in  every  respect,  distinct  in  appearance  from  the  adjacent 
county  of  Caernarvonshire.  It  is  generally  undulating  ground,  but  has  considerable  tracts 
perfectly  flat,  with  here  and  there  a  few  hills,  but  none  of  them  approaching  to  the  dignity  of 
mountains.  The  great  road  from  the  Menai  to  Holyhead  leads  nearly  through  the  middle  of 
the  island,  and,  in  its  whole  extent,  the  country,  both  to  the  right  and  left,  is  without  varia- 
tion, tame,  bald,  and  dreary.  Occasionally  you  see  a  clump  of  stunted  and  almost  leafless 
trees  about  a  farm-house,  but  the  general  face  of  the  land  is  perfectly  woodless,  with  stone 
walls  for  hedges,  or  banks  of  earth  without  a  bush  upon  them.  This  utter  nakedness  is 
not  the  necessary  consequence  of  its  exposure  to  the  sea  winds  ;  for,  in  the  low  grounds, 
trees  would  grow  as  well  as  they  do  on  the  banks  of  the  Menai ;  but  they  are  not  to  be 
reared  without  considerable  care  and  skill,  and  little  of  either  is  manifested  in  the  general 
Cultivation  of  Anglesey.  Agriculture  is  in  a  very  unimproved  state  in  many  parts  of 
Wales,  but  in  this  island  the  effects  of  slovenliness,  neglect,  and  ignorance,  are  particularly 
remarkable.  The  soil,  though  shallow,  is  exceedingly  fertile,  and  3'ields  large  quantities 
of  corn ;  but  I  frequently  observed  considerable  tracts  of  fine,  level  land,  covered  with 
nothing  but  heath,  furze,  and  fern.  Oats  and  barley  are  the  principal  produce ;  but  where 
wheat  is  grown,  the  crops  are  abundant  and  of  an  excellent  quality.  I  have  been  in- 
formed that  Anglesey  produces  more  corn  than  any  other  district  of  equal  extent  in 
Wales:  and,  though  I  doubt  the  fact,  yet  it  is  possible;  for,  after  large  deductions  for 
waste  grounds,  it  may  still  have  a  greater  portion  of  land  in  tillage,  as  there  is  not  a  hill  in 
the  island,  except  immediately  upon  the  coast,  that  is  too  steep  or  rugged  for  the  plough. 
I  have  never  travelled  through  a  country  that,  from  the  nature  of  its  surface,  seemed  more 
accessible  to  the  exertions  of  the  farmer,  and  that  was  at  the  same  time  so  little  improved 
by  the  ornamental  additions,  or  even  the  ordinary  neatness  of  agriculture.  To  travellers 
in  search  of  the  picturesque  it  presents  a  perfect  blank ;  and  my  friend  passed  from  one 
extremity  to  the  other  without  one  reference  to  his  sketch-book. 

We  stopped  at  G  windy,  the  Wine-House,  a  name  formerly  very  familiar  in  Wales, 
and  applied,  not  to  every  common  tavern,  but  to  the  houses  of  gentlemen  innkeepers. 
In  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries,  when  wrestling  and  throwing  the  sledge  were 
fashionable  amusements,  every  man  of  any  note  in  Wales  had  a  Wine-House,  in  which  wine 
"  was  sold  to  his  profit,"  to  parties  who  assembled  together  very  frequently  for  the  sake 

of 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  195 

of  those  manly  diversions.  They  drank  with  great  moderation  on  these  occasions,  and 
not,  as  Sir  John  Wynn  says,  "  in  the  healthing  and  gluttonous  manner  of  his  days*;"  but 
we  must  remember  that  in  his  days  the  hospitality  of  a  gentleman's  table  was  not  paid 
for.  It  is  singular  to  find  this  mean  and  sordid  spirit  mixed  with  a  system  of  life  and 
manners,  of  which  a  generous  and  boundless  hospitality  is  usually  a  leading  distinction, 
and  one  of  the  few  redeeming  virtues  that  give  it  any  thing  like  grace  or  dignity.  A 
highland  chieftain  would,  with  very  little  provocation,  have  cut  off  his  neighbour's  head, 
but  would  as  soon  have  lost  his  own  as  invited  him  to  his  board  that  he  might  pay  for  his 
wine.  One  would  give  sobriety  all  the  praise  that  is  its  due,  hut  these  Wine-Houses  were 
often  the  scenes  of  tumult  and  violence  of  a  far  more  outrageous  character  than  the  riots 
of  drunkenness.  The  state  of  society  in  Wales  at  this  period  was  quite  as  wild  and  law- 
less as  during  the  reign  of  its  native  princes;  and  no  two  families  of  different  names  and 
equal  pretensions  lived  near  each  other,  without  embroiling  the  whole  country  round  them 
in  discord  and  war.  When  a  man  had  murdered  another,  perhaps  for  reckoning  an  ap 
more  in  his  genealogy  than  he,  or  being  the  friend  of  one  who  did,  he  fled  to  the  Wine- 
House,  and  there  defended  himself,  with  sword  in  hand,  against  his  pursuers.  He  was 
always  supported  by  friends  and  retainers,  who,  if  they  had  no  personal  interest  in  his 
quarrel,  enlisted  in  his  cause  from  a  general  love  of  scuffling  and  fighting;  and,  with  their 
assistance,  he  sometimes  triumphed  over  all  opposition,  and  was  never  to  be  taken  without 
bloodshed.  Murder  was  so  familiar,  that  every  one  stood  upon  his  guard  as  in  a  time  of 
general  war;  all  the  confidence  and  security  of  domestic  society  was  destroyed;  every 
man  lived  in  his  house  as  in  a  fortification ;  and,  when  he  went  abroad,  was  as  re- 
gularly armed  as  if  going  into  a  field  of  battle.  When  the  flame  of  discord  was  once 
kindled  between  two  families,  it  burnt  on  through  a  series  of  generations ;  for  it  was  as 
much  a  matter  of  course  for  a  man  to  adopt  his  hereditary  enmities  as  his  title  and  estate. 
The  savage  and  bloody  spirit  of  the  times,  and  the  audacity  of  offenders,  were  encouraged 
by  the  laxity  of  the  law,  which  denounced  only  '  Llawruddion,'  the  Red-handed,  or  those 
who  had  actually  perpetrated  a  murder,  and  disregarded  accessaries.  There  was  no 
greater  strictness  in  this  respect  till  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  though  before  that 
period  the  people  had  become  somewhat  more  tame  and  civilized  -f-. 

About  seven  miles  from  G windy  we  crossed  over  Rhyd-Pont  bridge,  and  entered  the 
island  of  Holyhead,  which  is  separated  from  the  main  coast  of  Anglesey  by  a  narrow 
strait,  navigated  only  by  boats;  and,  except  towards  the  extremities,  nearly  dry  at  low 
water.  At  the  bridge  the  channel  is  not  more  than  sixty  or  seventy  yards  across,  but  it 
diverges  into  numerous  little  bays  and  creeks  on  each  shore,  which  make  it  of  very  unequal 
breadth  in  its  whole  extent.  The  island  is  about  seven  miles  in  length,  but  nowhere  more 
than  three  in  breadth.  It  is  deeply  indented  on  all  sides;  and,  in  the  centre,  almost  di- 

*  Hist,  of  the  Gwydir  Family,  p.  403.  f  Ibid,  passim, 

Tided 


196  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

vided  into  two  parts.  The  northern  and  broadest  division  projects  into  the  Irish  Sea  at 
right  angles  to  the  other,  and  forms,  with  the  northwestern  coast  of  Anglesey,  the  capa- 
cious bay  of  Holy  head.  The  interior  of  the  island  is  more  rough  and  barren  than  any 
other  part  of  Anglesey  that  we  had  yet  seen,  and  reminded  us  of  the  gloomy  and  desolate 
country  about  St.  David's.  Huge  fragments  of  rock  are  strewed  over  the  land ;  and 
where  there  is  vegetation  it  is  without  verdure.  Other  parts  of  Anglesey  appear  to  be 
waste  from  neglect,  but  this  too  rude  for  cultivation. 

The  distance  from  the  bridge  to  the  town  of  Holyhead,  which  is  situated  on  the  north- 
ern coast  of  the  island,  is  about  four  miles.  In  our  way  we  passed  by  a  methodist  chapel, 
which  was  not  only  crammed  to  bursting  within,  but  encompassed  by  a  crowd  of  men  and 
women  sitting  on  the  outside,  quite  out  of  sight  or  sound  of  the  preacher ;  but  from  the  des- 
peration of  their  looks,  apparently  communicating  with  him  by  some  mystical  connection. 
They  were  of  the  sect  of  Anabaptists,  vulgarly  called  Dippers.  I  observed  some  very 
pretty  faces  among  the  women,  but  with  an  expression  of  most  unseemly  and  unnatural 
sadness,  which  a  knight-errant  of  the  true  breed  would,  no  doubt,  have  avenged,  by  im- 
mediately sacrificing  the  wretch,  who,  enthroned  in  his  tub  as  the  interpreter  of  grace  to 
his  anxious  congregation,  had  power  only  to  send  them  away  with  heavy  hearts  and 
gloomy  looks. 

On  our  arrival  at  Holyhead  we  found  wretched  accommodations  in  a  large,  dirty,  and 
ill-provided  inn,  which  was  much  less  annoying  to  our  well-seasoned  and  blunted  feelings 
on  such  subjects,  than  it  must  prove  to  the  weary  and  sea-sick  passengers  from  Ireland. 
People  here  are  commonly  at  the  mercy  of  the  nice  punctuality  of  the  coach  or  the  packet; 
and,  therefore,  if  they  have  time  to  complain,  they  have  none  to  wait  for  redress  ;  and  if  they 
do  not  suffer  in  silence,  they  mutter  in  vain.  There  is  no  inn  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom 
which  has  more  extensive,  constant,  and  certain  custom ;  and  this  accounts  for,  if  it  does 
not  excuse,  the  little  exertion  that  is  made  by  the  proprietor  to  deserve  it.  There  is 
another  inn  of  rather  smaller  dimensions  and  meaner  appearance,  which  has  the  credit  of 
being  more  comfortable,  but  I  believe  only  among  those  who  do  not  frequent  it. 

The  situation  of  Holyhead  is  singularly  dreary  and  comfortless.  The  harbour  spreads 
over  a  large  space  inland,  forming  a  basin  in  the  shape  of  a  horse-shoe,  which  is,  at  least,  a 
mile  in  extent  from  one  point  round  to  the  other.  The  town  occupies  a  part  of  the  western 
bank,  and  is  excluded  from  a  view  of  the  main  sea  by  some  small  islands  at  the  harbour's 
mouth,  and  from  a  view  of  the  land  by  the  barren  rocks  which  bound  it  on  the  eastern 
side.  The  water  never  covers  the  whole  of  the  basin,  except  during  spring  tides ;  and  for 
eight  hours  out  of  twelve  it  is  quite  dry,  exposing  a  bottom  of  soft  mud.  The  town  is 
very  small,  consisting  principally  of  one  narrow  and  irregular  street:  the  houses  are 
mostly  inhabited  by  poor  people,  and  are,  of  course,  small ;  but  they  may  be  remarked 
for  their  neatness  and  cleanliness — distinctions  somewhat  rare  in  Welsh  towns  of  this 
degree.  There  is  no  trade  of  any  kind  in  the  place ;  but  the  continual  influx  of  strangers 

brings 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  197 

brings  money  into  it,  and  is  the  chief  support  of  the  inhabitants.    The  church  is  a  ve- 
nerable looking  building  of  Gothic  architecture,  but  rather  rudely  finished.     The  form 
is  that  of  a  cross,  but  the  proportions  are   all  very  small.      The  whole  building  has 
an  embattled  parapet.     There  is  nothing  observable  in   the  interior:  in  the  inside  of 
the  porch  there  is  some  clumsy  sculpture,  and  on  the  battlements  of  the  transepts  some 
grotesque  representations  of  men  and  monsters.     The  church  is  dedicated  to  St.  Gybi, 
a  man  of  high  note  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  and  a  zealous  assertor  of  the 
purity  of  the  true  religion  against  the  poisonous  sophistry  of  Arianism.     He  was  son  to 
Solomon,  Duke  of  Cornwall,  and,  after  being  the  disciple  of  St.  Hilary,  bishop  of  Poictiers, 
for  fifty  years,  is  said  to  have  fixed  himself  at  Holyhead,  which  is  still  called  Caer  Gybi  by 
the  Welsh,  and  bears,  in  its  Saxon  title,  a  memorial  of  its  ancient  sanctity.     In  compli- 
ment to  his  tutor  he  gave  the  name  of  St.  Hilary  to  a  promontory  on  the  coast  of  Anglesey, 
and  the  names  of  both  shall  be  remembered,  says  the  historian,  "  as  long  as  there  be  either 
waves  to  assault  the  shore,  or  rocks  to  resist  them*."     St.  Gybi  is  said  to  have  founded  a 
monastery  here  so  early  as  the  year  380 ;  but,  if  any  reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  the  au- 
thority of  the  ancient  British  genealogies,  the  event  has  been  most  egregiously  antedated. 
They  make  Solomon,  the  father  of  Gybi,  great  grandson  to  Constantine,  Duke  of  Corn  wall, 
who  succeeded  the  famous  Arthur  in  the  year  550.     There  is  a  tradition  still  familiar  in 
Anglesey,  which  tends  to  support  this  account  of  the  saint's  birth,  by  making  him  con- 
temporary with  St.  Seiriol,  a  man  of  great  sway  in  the  country,  who  founded  a  church  at 
Penmon,  near  the  west  point  of  Beaumaris  bay,  in  the  year  630.     The  story  runs,  that 
these  illustrious  compeers  frequently  met  together  at  certain  springs  near  Clorach,  in  the 
parish  of  Llandyfrydog,  to  compare  notes,  and  arrange  their  plans  for  the  due  govern- 
ment of  the  church  and  the  instruction  of  the  people.     They  were  called,  and  are  still 
called,  "Seiriol  wyn,  a  Gybi  felyn;"  Seiriol  the  fair,  and  Gybi  the  tawny.     This  com- 
plexional  incongruity  is  very  clearly  accounted  for.     Gybi's  journey  to  the  place  of  meet- 
ing lay  to  the  eastward  ;  and,  as  he  started  early  in  the  morning,  and  returned  in  the 
afternoon,  he  always  had  the  sun  in  his  face,  and,  by  consequence,  became  amazingly 
tanned  ;  whereas  his  friend  who  had  to  meet  him,  and  travelled  under  a  complete  reverse 
of  circumstances,    preserved  the  colour  of  his  cheeks  untarnished.     This  is  the  whole 
amount  of  the  tradition,  and  its  credibility  is  not  a  little  sanctioned  by  the  evidence  of 
two  holy  wells  near  Clorach,  which  still  retain  the  names  of  the  two  saints  with  their 
distinctive  additions.     Now  if  Constantine,  Duke  of  Cornwall,  was  advanced  in  life  at 
the  commencement  of  his  reign  in  550,  he  may  then  have  had  a  grandson  who,  in  570, 
may  have  begotten  Solomon ;  and  he,  between  that  period  and  the  year  600,  had  abun- 
dance of  time  to  become  the  father  of  Gybi,  who,  by  630,  would  be  in  the  utmost  vigour 
of  his  age,  and  fully  equal  to  the  toil  of  his  long  excursions  with  the  sun  in  his  face.     The 

«   Fuller's  Church  History.  f  Tanner,  CQ9. 

promontory 


198  VOVAGE  ROUND  GUEAT  BRITAIN. 

promontory,  said  to  have  been  formerly  called  St.  Hilary's  Point,  is  now  distinguished  by 
the  name  of  St.  Elian,  a  British  saint,  who  lived  in  the  reign  of  Caswallon  Law-hir*  the 
Long-handed,  a  prince  of  Anglesey  in  the  fifth  century.  He  is  frequently  called  by  Latin 
writers,  St.  Hilarius,  and  may  have  been  confounded  with  St.  Hilary  of  Poictiers,  who,  on 
the  credit  of  his  supposed  name  on  British  ground,  may  have  betn  converted  into  the  tutor 
of  St.  Gybi.  If  the  name  of  St.  Hilary  had  actually  been  conferred  on  the  promontory 
by  a  man  of  such  high  authority  as  our  tawny  saint,  it  is  very  improbable  that  it  would 
have  ceded  to  that  of  another.  But  it  is  really  quite  time  to  leave  the  subject. 

The  churchyard  at  Holy  head  has  been  strongly  fortified,  and  is  supposed  to  have 
been  a  military  post  long  before  the  foundation  of  the  church.  The  enclosure  is  two  hun- 
dred and  twenty  feet  long,  and  a  hundred  and  thirty  feet  wide,  defended  on  three  sides  by 
walls  seventeen  feet  in  height,  and  six  in  thickness,  with  round  towers  at  the  corners;  and 
on  the  fourth  side  by  the  low  but  precipitous  rocks  which  bound  the  harbour.  From  the 
nature  of  the  cement,  which  is  extremely  hard,  and  mixed  with  coarse  pebbles,  and  the 
general  style  of  the  masonry,  Mr.  Pennant  decided  that  the  Avork  was  evidently  Roman. 
The  towers  and  parts  of  the  wall  are  a  good  deal  mutilated ;  but  the  whole,  considering 
its  antiquity,  and  more  particularly  its  situation  in  a  country  exposed  for  centuries  to  the 
ravages  of  invaders,  has  been  very  remarkably  preserved.  Along  the  walls  are  two  rows 
of  circular  holes,  extending  completely  through  them,  and  scarcely  four  inches  in  dia- 
meter. These  small  perforations,  sometimes  not  three  inches  in  diameter,  are  found  in  the 
walls  of  most  Roman  forts  in  Britain,  and  have  puzzled  the  ingenuity  of  antiquaries,  and 
given  rise  to  many  jarring  conjectures.  Arrows  might  be  discharged  through  them,  with 
no  other  aim,  of  course,  than  that  controlled  by  the  duct ;  but  that  this  was  not  the  only 
object  of  them  is  evident,  because,  in  some  instances,  they  extend  through  the  walls  lon- 
gitudinally. Some  have  fancied  that  they  were  intended  to  admit  air  into  the  walls  for 
the  purpose  of  hardening  the  cement;  but  this  conjecture,  like  that  in  favour  of  the 
arrows,  does  not  comprehend  the  design  in  all  its  bearings,  for  the  holes  are  sometimes 
found  considerably  below  the  surface  of  the  ground.  As  they  are  peculiar  to  walls  built 
by  the  Romans,  they  are,  at  all  events,  of  some  service  at  present  in  identifying  their 
works.  There  is  no  remnant  of  their  art  in  Anglesey  except  this  fort  at  Holyhead  ;  and 
they  had,  probably,  no  other  station  in  the  county.  The  harbour  here  must  have  been  of 
importance  to  them  in  their  intercourse  with  Ireland,  to  which  they  traded,  though  they 
had  no  permanent  settlement  in  the  country. 

The  harbour,  in  its  natural  state,  was  inconvenient,  and  capable  of  admitting  only  a 
small  number  of  vessels,  and  those  of  small  burden;  but  the  improvements  now  going  on 
will  make  it  the  best  harbour  in  St.  George's  Channel.  It  is  protected  by  the  coasts  of  the 
bay  from  every  wind  but  the  north,  and  from  this  it  is  sheltered  by  a  small  rocky  island, 
called  Salt  Island,  lying  at  the  mouth,  and  separated  by  a  sound,  not  more  than  ten  or 
fifteen  yards  in  breadth,  from  the  main  land  on  the  western  side.  A  very  shallow  stream 

of 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  199 

of  water  flows  into  the  great  basin,  so  that  the  packets  and  other  vessels  frequenting 
the  harbour  lay  close  under  the  south  side  of  the  island,  and  here  they  were  not  afloat 
till  half  flood,  and  were  aground  at  half  ebb.  The  pier  is  to  be  carried  out  from  the  island 
in  a  straight  line,  six  hundred  feet  to  the  eastward :  the  depth  of  water  at  the  head  will 
be  fourteen  feet  at  low  water,  which  will  enable  the  packets  to  come  in  and  go  out  at  all 
hours  of  the  tide.  The  work  was  far  advanced  when  we  were  on  the  spot,  and  is  now, 
I  understand,  nearly  completed.  It  was  designed  by  Mr.  Rennie,  and,  from  its  form  and 
mode  of  construction,  seems  admirably  calculated  to  resist  the  power  of  the  sea.  The 
sea-front  is  an  inclined  plane,  a  hundred  and  eighty  feet  deep,  which  is  composed  of  un- 
hewn stones;  those  of  the  outer  stratum  being  laid  edgeways,  and  closely  jammed  together. 
The  upper  extremity  of  the  plane  is  bounded  by  a  strong  wall  faced  with  thick  slabs  of 
black  marble:  the  quay  and  the  inner  front  are  also  faced  with  the  same  kind  of  stone, 
which  is  procured  from  a  quarry  a  few  miles  from  the  spot.  This  plan  of  opposing  a 
gradual  resistance  to  the  sea  by  an  inclined  plane  is  infinitely  preferable,  in  all  respects, 
to  the -usual  mode  of  limiting  it  at  once  by  a  pier  with  a  perpendicular  front.  It  is  on  a 
much  better  principle  with  regard  to  the  durability  of  the  work,  and  furnishes  a  much 
more  effectual  barrier  against  the  spray  of  the  sea.  In  violent  gales  of  wind  blowing 
from  the  sea,  the  waves,  on  being  suddenly  checked  by  a  perpendicular  wall,  fly  up  in 
a  heavy  body  of  spray,  which  is  forced  on  by  the  wind,  and  renders  the  quay  dangerous, 
if  not  impassable.  By  the  inclined  plane  this  evil  is  avoided:  when  the  waves  break 
upon  it  they  instantly  spread  into  a  sheet  of  foam,  which,  in  its  advance,  is  so  checked  by 
the  acclivity  of  the  ground,  and  the  return  of  the  backwater,  that  only  an  inconsiderable 
sprinkling  reaches  the  quay.  But  I  am  describing  what  can  scarcely  have  escaped  the 
observation  of  any  one  who  has  been  at  the  sea-side,  and  seen  the  waves  break  on  a 
shelving  beach,  and  against  a  rocky  and  abrupt  shore. 

Before  the  pier  was  carried  out  to  more  than  half  its  length,  the  harbour  was  found 
to  be  so  much  improved  that  numerous  vessels,  bound  up  and  down  channel,  flocked  to 
it  for  shelter  in  bad  weather ;  and  it  is  now  frequently  so  crowded  and  blocked  up,  that 
the  packets  have  not  that  accommodation  and  facility  of  access  and  egress  which  the  pier 
was  designed  to  give  them.  The  largest  ships  are  ranged  in  a  line  in  the  deepest  water; 
so  that  vessels  sailing  in  are  obliged  to  take  a  broad  sweep  round  them,  and  are  endan- 
gered by  some  sunken  rocks  lying  near  the  eastern  side  of  the  mouth.  To  exclude 
vessels  in  times  of  distress  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  and  it  is  therefore  proposed,  in 
order  to  render  the  harbour  as  widely  beneficial  as  possible,  to  enlarge  it  still  further 
by  making  an  extensive  wet  dock  in  the  inner  part  of  the  basin,  to  which  the  greater 
number  of  vessels  frequenting  the  harbour  may  retire,  leaving  the  entrance  always  un- 
obstructed. This  new  plan  is  to  be  brought  before  parliament  in  the  present  session, 
and  its  expediency  is  so  obvious,  that  there  is  little  doubt  of  its  being  acceded  to.  The 

r>  n  crowded 


200  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

crowded  state  of  the  harbour  is  the  best  proof  of  its  importance :  it  lies  in  the  centre  of 
St.  George's  Channel,  between  two  deep  and  dangerous  bays,  and  is  a  most  valuable  place 
of  shelter,  in  sudden  storms,  to  coasting  vessels  of  all  classes  in  the  great  stream  of  trade 
between  the  Clyde  and  the  Thames. 

The  sound  between  Salt  Island  and  the  north-western  point  of  the  main  land  acts  as 
a  drain,  which  is  of  great  service  in  preserving  the  navigable  part  of  the  harbour  free  from 
sand  and  mud.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  water  always  runs  out  of  this  channel  during 
the  flood  as  well  as  the  ebb.  The  tide,  or  rather  a  branch  of  it,  which  enters  at  the  great 
mouth,  escapes  in  a  constant  stream  through  this  small  outlet,  and  continues  to  flow 
in  a  circle  round  the  island  till  high  water.  I  endeavoured  to  gain  an  explanation  of  this 
singularity  on  the  spot,  from  those  who  were  better  acquainted  with  the  depths  and  shal- 
lows, and  the  course  of  the  currents,  than  I  could  become  from  my  own  cursory  observa- 
tion ;  but  my  enquiries  met  with  no  success.  I  attribute  it,  under  correction,  to  the  dif- 
ference in  the  direction  of  the  entrances,  and  to  obstructions  in  the  inner  part  of  the  har- 
bour. The  direction  of  the  harbour's  mouth  is  E.S.E.  and  W.N.W.,  and  that  of  the 
sound  N.N.W.  and  S.S.E.,  so  that  the  stream  flowing  in  at  the  former  has  a  direct  ten- 
dency towards  the  sound,  and,  being  impeded  by  the  elevation  of  the  bottom  in  its  pro- 
gress into  the  basin,  forces  a  passage  through  it.  The  water  must  be  very  feebly  pro- 
pelled towards  the  mouth  of  the  sound,  or  this  counter-current  would  of  course  not 
prevail :  the  impediments  in  the  basin  may  retard  the  advance  of  the  water  in  a  certain 
direction,  but  could  not  force  it  into  another  against  a  resisting  stream  of  equal  weight. 
The  sound  is  more  directly  opposed  to  the  main  sea  than  the  larger  entrance,  but 
the  approaches  to  it  on  the  sea-side  are  much  obstructed  by  rocks,  which,  no  doubt, 
check  the  advance  of  the  tide.  When  the  channel  is  excavated  for  the  new  dock,  this  ir- 
regular current,  I  imagine,  will  cease,  meeting  with  less  resistance  to  its  progress  inland 
than  to  its  passage  through  the  sound. 

The  expense  of  all  the  improvements  connected  with  the  harbour,  among  which  is  a 
new  road  extending  from  the  pier  to  the  large  inn,  is  estimated  at  67,8()2/.  The  road, 
though  not  more  than  half  a  mile  in  length,  was  a  laborious  and  expensive  work,  for  it  was 
raised,  nearly  in  its  whole  extent,  upon  the  mud  along  the  western  side  of  the  basin.  It 
was  rendered  necessary  by  the  extreme  inconvenience  of  the  street  through  the  town,  which 
is  so  narrow  that  two  carriages  cannot  pass  in  it  abreast.  The  proposed  new  dock  is  not 
included  in  the  above  estimate.  One  of  the  items  was  3000/.  for  the  purchase-money  of 
Salt  Island,  which  the  owner  suddenly  discovered  to  be  of  great  value  to  him  when  it  be- 
came a  necessary  acquisition  to  government.  He  demanded  2000/.  as  a  compensation  for 
a  small  lighthouse,  and  WOOL  for  the  island;  enough  in  all  conscience  for  an  acre  of  rock. 
The  lighthouse  will  soon  be  pulled  down,  and  a  new  one  constructed  upon  the  pier-head. 

There  are  seven  packets  belonging  to  Holyhead,  one  of  which  sails  every  day,  if  not 

prevented 


The  Harbour  light-house,  Holyhead 


Light-house  on  the  South  Stack,  Holyhead 


VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  201 

prevented  by  the  weather.  They  are  all  fine,  stout  sloops,  admirably  appointed,  and 
commanded  by  gentlemen  of  high  respectability.  This  is  by  far  the  most  convenient  port 
to  sail  from  for  Dublin,  and  the  passage  is  shorter,  and  more  safe  and  certain  than  from 
any  other  point  on  the  British  coast.  The  packets  here,  after  leaving  the  harbour,  are 
speedily  clear  of  the  land ;  but  those  which  sail  from  Park-gate  and  Liverpool  have  to 
work  their  way  out  of  a  deep  bay  beset  with  shoals. 

We  made  an  excursion  by  sea  to  the  Head,  which  lies  about  two  miles  to  the  west- 
ward of  the  town.  We  were  accompanied  by  two  gentlemen,  residents  in  the  place,  who 
very  kindly  proposed  to  be  our  guides  and  instructors  through  the  entertainments  of  the 
day.  One  of  our  companions  was  Captain  Fellowes,  formerly  commander  of  the  Lady 
Hobart,  a  Newfoundland  packet,  and  well  known  from  his  sufferings  and  remarkable  pre- 
servation in  a  small  open  boat,  after  the  loss  of  his  vessel  on  an  island  of  ice.  We  had 
the  pleasure  of  becoming  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Fellowes,  who  was  one  of  the  passengers, 
and  who  bore  up  against  the  complicated  misery  of  her  situation  with  extraordinary 
strength  of  mind,  and  encouraged  her  fellow-sufferers  by  an  example  of  unvarying  spirit 
and  fortitude.  I  feel  gratified  in  here  acknowledging  their  kindness  and  hospitality  to 
us  during  our  stay  at  Holyhead. 

We  set  forward  on  our  cruise  on  a  cheerful,  sunny  day,  which  gave  lustre  and 
beauty  to  the  sea,  if  it  shone  with  little  effect  on  the  forbidding  barrenness  of  the  land. 
Immediately  after  quitting  the  harbour  we  had  the  Head  in  view  before  us,  with  the 
rugged  rocks  on  its  summit  sharply  marked  out  against  a  clear,  blue,  sky.    The  mountain 
rises  abruptly,  and  is  the  more  conspicuous  from  being  a  solitary  mountain,  contrasted  on 
one  side  with  a  flat,  naked  country,  and  on  the  other  with  the  wide  level  of  the  sea.     Its 
greatest  length  lies  north  and  south,  and  occupies  nearly  the  whole  western  front  of  the 
island.     The  intervening  coast  between  the  harbour  and  the  Head  is  singularly  shattered 
and  indented.     It  is  composed  of  a  green,  magnesian,  slate  rock,  in  vertical  strata,  which 
expose  their  jagged  edges  to  the  sea.     They  frequently  stretch  out  in  long  wedge-like 
projections,  and,  as  the  tide  retires,  it  discloses  here  and  there  a  black  and  horrid  spot. 
The  rocks  that  are  washed  by  the  sea  are,  in  general,  perfectly  black,  and  I  imagine 
that  their  colour  is  the  effect  of  their  exposure  to  the  salt  water.     The  effect,  indeed,  is 
by  no  means  invariable,  and  the  same  kind  of  rock  frequently  changes  from  grey  to  black, 
within  a  very  limited  space,  where  out  of  the  reach  of  the  sea;  but  I  have  often  observed, 
both  on  slate  and  limestone  cliffs,  a  regular  stripe  of  black  up  to  high  water  mark,  above 
which  the  rock  was  grey.     About  a  mile  to  the  westward  of  the  harbour  we  observed 
two  or  three  low  dark  caverns  at  the  base  of  the  cliffs,  which  run  in  to  an  extent  of 
which  no  one  has  ever  been  able  to  discover  the  limits.     The  attempt,  we  were  assured, 
has  often  been  made,  but  whether  with  sufficient  perseverance  to  authorise  the  popular 
conclusion  in  the  neighbourhood,  that  the  passages  have  no  end,  I  cannot  determine.     As 

D  D  2  we 


202  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

we  could  not  approach  them  in  our  boat  without  some  risk,  we  passed  by  them  without  a 
pause,  and  soon  came  to  the  southwest  point  of  Holyhead  bay,  from  whence  the  coast 
turns  abruptly  to  the  southward.  We  had  now  the  grand  sea-front  of  the  promontory 
extending  before  us,  which  exhibited  a  scene  of  exceeding  rudeness  and  sublimity.  We 
rowed  out  a  short  distance  to  sea,  and  had  the  whole  face  of  the  mountain  in  view. 
Its  length  from  north  to  south  is  somewhat  less  than  a  mile  and  a  half.  At  each  ex- 
tremity there  is  a  small  island,  the  North  and  the  South  Stacks.  The  former  is  a  mass 
of  black  rock  of  inconsiderable  height,  savagely  rugged  all  round,  and  with  the  summit 
bristling  up  in  innumerable  short,  sharp,  points.  The  South  Stack  is  much  loftier,  and 
appeared  like  a  projection  of  the  main  land,  which  towered  up  to  an  immense  height 
above  it.  On  the  top  of  this  island  there  is  a  lighthouse,  a  handsome  white  tower, 
and  a  single  cottage,  which  formed  striking  objects  amidst  the  rude  grandeur  of  this  vast 
solitude.  Between  the  Stacks  the  promontory  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  de- 
scending to  the  sea  in  a  continued  precipice  three  hundred  feet,  and,  in  places,  four  hun- 
dred feet  in  height,  above  which  the  upper  part  of  the  mountain  rose  in  an  acclivity 
scarcely  less  precipitous,  and  roughened  along  the  whole  line  of  its  summit  with  confused 
piles  of  shivered  rock. 

We  returned  close  in  to  the  shore,  and,  the  sea  being  smooth,  were  enabled  to 
make  free  with  the  rocks,  as  sailors  say,  and  examine  them  in  all  their  detail.  A  little  to 
the  southward  of  the  North  Stack  there  are  some  grand  caverns,  the  most  remarkable  of 
which  is  called  the  Parliament  House.  We  entered  it  through  a  noble  arch  about  seventy 
feet  in  height,  and  though  we  observed  none  of  those  resemblances  to  art  in  any  of  its 
parts,  or  in  any  combination  of  them,  that  the  uame  had  led  us  to  expect,  yet  we  were 
very  much  struck  with  its  vastness  and  the  ruggedness  of  its  sides,  and  the  awful  signs  of 
devastation  which  it  exhibited  in  the  broken  strata  over  our  heads.  The  cavern  runs 
nearly  parallel  with  the  shore,  and  is  thirty  or  forty  yards  deep,  and  at  least  a  hundred 
feet  in  height.  There  are  two  entrances  divided  by  a  solid  column  of  rock,  which,  by  a 
loose  computation,  we  determined  to  be  two  hundred  feet  in  circumference.  The  whole 
promontory  i  chloritic  schist,  in  strata  seldom  exceeding  six  feet  in  thickness ;  but  this 
enormous  column  appeared  to  be  one  solid  mass,  and,  from  this  compactness  of  structure, 
has  resisted  the  power  which  has  broken  down  the  rocks  all  round  it.  The  arch  through 
which  we  entered  faces  the  Avest ;  the  other  entrance  inclines  rather  to  the  south,  and  is 
much  larger  in  its  dimensions,  and  more  irregular  in  its  form,  spreading  out  into  a  vast 
breadth,  and  admitting  a  strong  light  into  every  part  of  the  cavern.  The  sea,  and  the 
rocks  without,  and  the  Stack  crowned  with  its  lofty  white  tower,  appeared  through  this 
magnificent  portal  with  a  singular  and  most  romantic  effect. 

If  the  formation  of  this  immense  excavation  be  attributed  to  the  action  of  the  sea,  it 
must  have  been  the  work  of  a  long  series  of  ages,  for,  of  many  thousand  tons  of  rock  that 

have 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  203 

have  fallen  down,  there  are  now  no  traces  to  be  distinguished.  There  are  some  large 
craggy  masses  rising  above  the  water  at  both  entrances,  but  in  the  interior  the  sea  covers 
the  whole  bottom,  and  is  of  considerable  depth.  It  is  accessible  only  by  boats,  at  all 
hours  of  the  tide,  but  in  moderate  weather  they  may  enter  with  perfect  security.  Along 
the  whole  western  side  of  the  Head  the  sea  flows  up  to  the  rocks  at  low  water. 

A  little  to  the  south  of  this  cavern  the  face  of  the  cliff  has  a  very  striking  and  magni- 
ficent appearance.  For  an  extent  of  sixty  or  seventy  yards  the  strata  present  their  edges 
to  the  sea,  slightly  divided,  and  resemble  a  facade  of  slender  columns,  descending  from  an 
elevation  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet  perpendicularly,  and  without  a  break,  to  the  sea. 
There  are  parts  of  the  Head  much  loftier,  but  none  of  equal  height  with  so  broad  a  surface 
perfectly  perpendicular.  Further  south  the  precipice  is  broken,  and  irregular,  frequently 
perpendicular  on  its  upper  front,  and  terminating  at  the  base  in  dark  hollows,  and  abrupt 
and  shattered  crags.  Various  sea-fowl  breed  in  these  cliffs,  but  none  in  any  considerable 
numbers,  except  Gulls.  The  birds  of  passage  had  all  disappeared ;  but,  in  a  later  excur- 
sion which  we  made  to  the  Head  in  the  summer  of  1814,  we  saw  some  of  them  in  full 
bustle  and  clamour.  There  were  a  few  Guillemots  and  Razor-Bills,  but  only  in  one 
particular  place,  where  they  had  found  a  shelf  or  two  among  the  rocks,  adapted  to  their 
peculiar  manner  of  incubation.  Schistose  rocks,  from  their  sharpness,  and  the  position 
of  the  strata,  afford  very  bad  seats  to  these  birds,  which  make  no  nest,  and  always  sit 
upon  ledges  immediately  over  the  sea,  from  whence  they  can  take  flight  with  ease,  and 
thrust  their  young  into  the  water.  Their  legs  are  placed  so  far  back  that  they  stand 
quite  upright,  and,  in  such  a  posture,  they  cannot  rise  from  the  ground  without  great 
difficulty  and  exertion,  and  therefore  choose  sitting-places,  from  which  they  can  at  once 
throw  themselves  into  the  air.  We  saw  them  in  various  parts  of  the  Welsh  coast ;  but 
always,  excepting  this  promontory,  on  limestone  cliffs,  where  the  projecting  termina- 
tions of  the  smooth  horizontal  strata  give  them  the  best  possible  accommodations.  A 
few  Herons  annually  come  to  breed  on  the  Head;  but  they,  with  their  young,  had  fled 
before  the  time  of  our  last  visit  to  the  spot,  the  latter  end  of  July.  Herons  do  not  migrate 
from  Britain  till  late  in  the  autumn,  and  these  had  only  changed  their  haunts  on  the 
coast.  Their  nests  were  remaining,  and  seemed  to  be  curiously  fixed  to  a  smooth  preci- 
pice at  a  vast  height  above  the  sea.  We  could  not  perceive  how  they  were  supported, 
and  the  greater  part  of  each  evidently  projected  from  the  cliff.  They  were  very  large, 
and  looked  like  round,  deep,  wicker-baskets.  At  the  time  of  our  present  excursion,  the 
Gulls  were  the  only  tenants  of  the  rocks;  and,  as  we  rowed  along,  they  rose  in  large 
flocks  over  our  heads,  with  loud  and  ceaseless  cries,  which  gave  a  superadded  wildness 
to  the  rude  solitude  around  us. 

We  landed  about  midway  between  the  two  Stacks,  on  a  beach  in  a  small  recess,  to 
look  upon  a  spot  lately  the  scene  of  a  dismal  shipwreck.  In  March,  1807,  in  a  snow- 
storm 


204  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

storm  and  dark  night,  a  small  sloop  from  Waterford,  bound  to  Liverpool,  with  four  men 

on  board,  was  here  cast  ashore.     The  men  escaped  from  her  to  the  beach,  but  were  shut 

out  by  the  cliffs  from  any  chance  of  access  to  the  land.     They  were  found  the  next  day, 

all  dead.     One  of  them,  with  incredible  power,  had  climbed  up  the  cliff  to  within  eight 

feet  of  the  summit,  where  he  was  stopped  by  a  perpendicular  rock  :  he  lay  with  his  head 

leaning  on  his  hand  in  a  sleeping  posture.     Another  was  about  fifty  feet  lower  down,  and 

had  a  deep  wound  on  his  head,  with  one  of  his  stockings  bound  round  it.     Another  lay 

on  the  beach ;  and  the  captain  was  found  in  a  small  cavern,  to  which  he  had  retreated  for 

shelter.     They  were  all  supposed  to  have  perished  with  cold.     This  is  the  only  place  along 

the  whole  front  of  the  Head  at  which  they  could  have  landed  ;  and  the  cliff  here,  except 

towards  the  summit,  is  less  completely  inaccessible  than  any  other  part  of  the  precipice, 

but  still  so  steep,  that  I  should  have  conceived  it  utterly  impracticable  for  any  human 

being  to  have  clambered  to  the  height  that  one  of  these  wretched  men  had  reached ; 

and  he  was  in  darkness,  and  freezing  with  cold.      The  fate  of  these  poor  fellows  was 

brought  very  home  to  our  feelings  by  the  manner  in  which  it  was  related  to  us  by  a 

seaman  who  was  present  at  the  discovery  of  the  bodies,  and  pointed  out  to  us  the  very 

spots  where  they  lay.     Their  vessel  was  dashed  to  pieces,  and  some  fragments  of  the 

wreck  were  still  to  be  seen  on  the  beach. 

After  leaving  this  cove,  and  rounding  a  slight  projection,  the  South  Stack  was  dis- 
closed to  us  in  a  new  point  of  view,  and  in  the  highest  degree  fanciful  and  picturesque. 
We  now  perceived  that  the  island  was  connected  with  the  mainland  by  a  rope-bridge,  a 
light  and  airy  structure,  fixed  to  the  face  of  a  huge  precipice,  and  suspended  over  a  horrid 
chasm  high  above  the  sea,  which,  fretted  by  rocks  and  a  boiling  current,  was  foaming  be- 
neath it.  The  whole  imagery  was  so  novel  and  strange;  there  was  something  so  surprising 
in  this  combination  of  art  with  forms  of  nature  so  wild  and  rude,  that  the  scene  struck  us 
like  a  creation  of  romance.  We  rowed  round  to  the  south  side  of  the  island,  and  from 
thence  the  bridge,  in  all  its  relations,  was  at  once  explained  to  the  eye.  From  its  ter- 
mination at  the  Head  a  zig-zag  track  of  steps  leads  up  to  the  summit  of  the  cliff,  which, 
by  admeasurement,  is  four  hundred  and  twenty  feet  above  the  sea.  We  could  trace  the 
path  in  all  its  inflections,  and,  while  my  friend  was  using  his  pencil,  two  men  from  the 
island  passed  over  the  bridge,  and  their  figures  winding  among  the  rocks,  and  slowly 
lessening  away,  gave  infinite  character  to  the  scene. 

We  landed  near  the  north-east  point  of  the  Stack,  close  to  the  entrance  of  a  large 
cavern,  more  strikingly  picturesque,  I  think,  though  on  a  less  magnificent  scale  than  the 
Parliament  House.  The  cliff  is  ninety  feet  in  height,  and  the  mouth  of  the  cavern,  in  the 
form  of  an  irregular  arch,  about  fifty.  The  interior  spreads  into  a  spacious  chamber,  black 
and  dismal,  and  near  its  extremity  a  low  passage  diverges  to  the  left,  which  is  continued, 
in  an  oblique  direction,  completely  through  the  island,  and  you  may  see  the  light  through 

the 


Part  of  the  South  Stack,  Holyhead 


The  Rope  Bridge,  near  the  Lighthouse,  Holyhead 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    13HITAIN.  205 

the  opposite  opening.  The  ends  of  the  broken  strata  hang  in  unequal  lengths  from  the 
roof,  and  along  the  rough  fractures  the  rock  appears  of  a  fresh  colour,  as  if  recently  rent 
asunder.  The  sea  is  of  considerable  depth  in  the  cavern,  but  so  beautifully  clear,  that  the 
drrk  and  rugged  bottom  is  distinctly  seen.  The  cliff  above  the  mouth  is  quite  perpendi- 
cular, but  curiously  diversified  by  the  contortions  of  the  strata,  Avhich  present  their  edges 
to  the  view  crossed  by  numerous  seams,  and  running  down  in  irregularly  waved  lines,  and 
some  in  sharp,  sudden  bends,  like  the  chevron-work  on  a  Saxon  arch.  The  face  of  the  rock 
looks  as  if  figured  over  with  tracery,  and  it  is  further  decorated  by  a  multiplicity  of  colours, 
a  very  dark  brown  spotted  all  over  with  stains  of  many  hues,  and  here  and  there  traversed 
by  a  vein  of  milk-white  quartz.  Art  could  scarcely  have  given  to  the  arch  a  more  richly 
variegated  face.  A  long  white  boat  suspended  from  a  crane  at  the  top  of  the  cliff,  hung 
across  the  mouth  of  the  cavern,  and  had  an  excellent  effect.  There  is  a  small  recess  in 
the  rocks  at  this  point  of  the  island  which  is  sheltered  from  every  wind  but  the  north,  and, 
when  this  blows,  a  boat  may  land  on  the  south  side,  near  the  east  end,  but  not  very  con- 
veniently. Except  from  these  two  places,  the  cliffs  all  round  are  perfectly  inaccessible. 

We  ascended  by  some  steps  cut  in  the  rock  from  the  landing  place  to  the  top  of  the 
island,  where  the  bridge  imperatively  demanded  our  earliest  examination.  It  is  made  of 
strong  net-work,  with  sides  about  four  feet  high,  and  with  a  flooring  of  deal  planks,  some- 
what more  than  a  yard  in  width.  The  ends  are  fastened  to  the  rocks  by  means  of  iron 
bolts,  and  at  intervals  are  several  stays  to  prevent  it  from  swinging  in  the  wind.  As  these, 
however,  whether  attached  to  the  island  or  the  Head,  lead  from  it  in  oblique  lines,  they  are 
but  of  little  use.  The  bridge  sinks  considerably  in  the  centre,  and  hangs  in  the  form  of  an 
inverted  arch :  the  length  is  eighty  feet,  and  the  lowest  part  is  seventy  feet  above  the  sea. 
It  is  very  well  secured,  I  have  no  doubt,  but  it  bends  and  cracks  as  you  walk  over  it,  and 
sucli  intimations  might  be  construed,  by  a  nervous  man,  into  signs  of  instability.  I  be- 
lieve that  few  people,  on  a  first  trial,  would  feel  themselves  dancing  along  this  elastic  path 
without  some  little  quickening  of  the  pulse;  though  I  do  not  mean  to  magnify  the  matter, 
or  insinuate  that  there  are  any  reasonable  pretences  for  apprehension.  We  made  several 
visits  to  the  spot,  and,  on  one  occasion,  crossed  the  bridge  when  a  strong  wind  was 
blowing,  and  the  passage,  nerves  out  of  the  question,  was  really  frightful.  In  very  violent 
gales  it  is  quite  impracticable,  not  only  from  the  force  of  the  wind,  but  the  spray  of  the 
sea.  Before  the  bridge  was  constructed  there  was  a  mode  of  conveyance  across  the  gulph 
of  a  far  more  petrifying  description.  A  single  rope  was  attached  to  the  rocks  on  each 
side,  and  on  this  was  slung  a  wooden  cradle,  in  which  the  passenger  sat  and  hauled  him- 
self over  by  means  of  a  rope  and  blocks. 

There  is  a  ledge  of  rocks  between  the  Stack  and  the  Head,  fragments  of  which  rise 
above  the  sea  at  all  times  of  the  tide.  A  few  years  ago  a  large  West  Indiaman  was 
driven  into  this  narrow  passage,  and,  entering  with  great  impetus,  became  so  firmly 
wedged  in  between  the  island  and  a  mass  of  rock  in  the  channel,  that,  when  the  tide  fell, 

she 


206  VOYAGE    UOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

she  was  suspended  without  any  support  from  the  water.  She  was  broken  up  in  this  situa- 
tion; and,  during  the  operation  of  taking  her  to  pieces,  part  of  her  live  cargo,  a  com- 
pany of  rats,  made  their  escape  to  the  island,  being  the  first  quadrupeds  that  ever  gained 
access  to  it.  They  prove  great  pests  to  the  people,  but  have  multiplied  very  freely  in  spite 
of  poison  and  traps,  and  seem  likely  to  transmit  the  benefit  of  their  singular  preservation 
through  a  long  posterity. 

The  Stack  is  of  an  oblong  form,  and  about  half  a  mile  in  circumference.     It  rises  on 
all  sides  in  abrupt  and  naked  precipices,  and  exhibits  on  each  side  some  new  and  strange 
appearance  in  the  arrangement  and  various  modulations  of  the  rocks.     It  is  composed  of 
the  same  kind  of  schistus  as  the  main  coast,  in  strata  generally  perpendicular  to  the  ho- 
rizon, with  their  flat  surfaces  north  and  south,  and  their  edges  east  and  west.     On  the 
south  side  of  the  island  there  is  a  square  recess  in  the  cliff,  including  its  whole  height, 
about  a  hundred  and  thirty  feet,  and  cut  out  with  singular  regularity.     In  front  hangs  a 
vast  sheet  of  rock,  preserving  an  unbroken  continuity,  but  swelling  out  at  intervals  down 
its  whole  surface  in  gentle,  horizontal  waves.     It  has  the  appearance  of  an  immense  cur- 
tain flapping  and  undulating  in  the  wind.     On  the  sides  of  the  recess  the  edges  of  the 
strata  appear  similarly  waved,  with  their  surfaces  all  honeycombed  and  dissected,  pre- 
senting a  curious  specimen  of  natural  sculpture.     The  rocks  all  round  the  island  are 
strongly  marked  by  the  injuries  of  time,  but  most  particularly  so  on  the  southern  side. 
A  few  yards  to  the  east  of  the  recess  there  is  a  mass  of  rock  in  a  very  remarkable  state  of 
decay.     It  has  been  partially  eaten  away  to  the  depth  of  nearly  a  foot,  and  the  surface  is 
left  in  thin  ridges  and  flakes,  full  of  perforations,  and  with  edges  as  sharp  as  a  knife.     The 
boatman  who  pointed  out  this  ragged  rock  to  me,  referred  its  decomposition  to  the  action 
of  the  violent  southerly  gales,  and  his  exposition  at  least  suggested  a  good  illustration  of 
its  present  appearance,  which  is  very  like  that  of  a  body  blown  into  shreds  and  tatters  by 
the  wind.     On  the  west  side  of  the  island  the  great  vertical  tables  of  rock  jut  out  in  dif- 
ferent degrees  of  projection,  jagged  and  splintered,  and  present  a  truly  horrid  front.     At 
the  north-western  corner  the  cliff  is  faced  with  one  smooth  stratum,  which  seems  as  if  it 
had  slipped  from  its  place,  and  rests  upon  the  island  in  an  inclined  position,  at  an  angle 
of  about  seventy  with  the  plane  of  the  horizon.     It  is  about  thirty  feet  in  breadth,  and 
descends  without  a  break  to  the  sea,  a  depth  of  at  least  a  hundred  and  forty  feet.     This 
single  stratum  seems  to  form  a  solitary  exception  to  the  common  position  of  the  sur- 
rounding strata:  along  the  remainder  of  the  northern  front  of  the  island  they  are  re- 
gularly vertical.     On   the  main  coast,  immediately  opposite  to  the  Stack,  they  have 
been  subjected  to  more  complicated  and  remarkable  variations.     For  a  certain  space 
about  a  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  as  many  in  breadth,  including  the  base  of  the  cliff, 
they  are  all  doubled  down,  but  not  broken,  describing  large  curves  or  arches,  arch  within 
arch,  with  the  edges  of  each  twisted  into  a  most  perplexing  variety  of  capricious  contor- 
tions, and  the  general  surface  chipped  and  fretted  into  minute  parts  resembling  intricate 

and 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  207 

and  fantastic  carving.  This  part  of  the  promontory  is  pointed  out  to  strangers  as  a  kind 
of  lusus  naturae,  a  monstrous  and  unprecedented  production,  and  it  certainly  is  the  most 
extraordinary  mass  of  rock  that  I  ever  beheld  :  the  strata  resting  upon  those  which  are 
thus  warped  and  bent,  and  those  on  each  side  of  them  are  vertical,  and  seamed  all  over 
by  oblique  and  horizontal  fissures.  I  presume  only  to  describe  the  actual  forms  produced 
by  these  partial  changes,  for  I  am  not  yet  sufficiently  conversant  with  the  subject  of  geo- 
logy to  hazard  an  opinion  as  to  their  cause.  Appearances  of  a  similar  character  have 
been  explained  by  some  geologists  as  the  effects  of  crystallization,  and  I  yield  implicitly 
to  their  decision. 

The  light-house  stands  near  the  western  extremity  of  the  island  on  its  highest  point. 
It  has  a  revolving  light,  produced  by  Argand  lamps  and  reflectors  so  arranged  as  to  form 
three  faces,  one  of  which  is  shewn  every  two  minutes.  By  these  variations  it  is  readily 
distinguishable  from  a  stationary  light  on  the  Skerries,  situated  off  the  opposite  point  of 
Holyhead  Bay,  and  bearing  from  the  Stack  N.E.,  distant  eight  miles.  The  light  is  ele- 
vated two  hundred  and  one  feet  above  the  sea,  and  is  distinctly  seen  from  every  point  from 
whence  its  guidance  is  of  importance.  Before  the  erection  of  the  light-house,  this  coast 
was  a  scene  of  perpetual  disaster.  The  Head  projects  so  far  into  the  sea,  that  it  is  still  a 
point  of  anxious  consideration  in  the  navigation  of  this  part  of  the  channel,  but  it  was  for- 
merly a  terrible  object  indeed.  To  the  south  of  it  is  the  deep  and  dangerous  bay  of  Caer- 
narvon; and,  to  the  Avest,  a  violent  race,  which,  in  stormy  weather,  ploughs  up  a  tre- 
mendous sea,  breaking  in  all  directions.  Vessels  bound  up  St.  George's  Channel,  and 
sailing  across  Caernarvon  Bay  in  dark  nights,  with  no  guide  to  direct  them,  had  no  means 
of  ascertaining  their  situation,  or  regulating  their  course  with  any  certainty  according  to 
the  projection  of  the  Head,  and  were  Avrecked  in  numbers  along  the  northern  coast  of  the 
bay.  A  vessel  was  seldom  wrecked  without  the  loss  of  the  whole  crew,  for  the  shores  of 
the  bay  are  so  beset  with  outlying  rocks,  that  there  is  no  access  to  the  land.  Mr.  Evans, 
at  whose  suggestion  the  light-house  was  erected,  shewed  us  a  drawing  that  he  had  made, 
representing  the  different  situations  of  twenty-two  vessels  which  were  all  cast  ashore  in 
the  course  of  one  night  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Head.  Numerous  vessels  which  have 
been  lost,  but  never  accounted  for,  are  supposed  to  have  foundered  in  the  race,  which,  in 
gales  of  wind,  is  almost  as  much  to  be  dreaded  as  the  shore.  The  light-house  has  proved 
a  certain  guardian  amidst  these  complicated  dangers,  and,  in  combination  with  the  light 
on  the  Skerries,  has  rendered  the  bays  of  Caernarvon  and  Holyhead  navigable  with  as 
much  safety  by  night  as  by  da}r.  Since  the  first  exhibition  of  the  light  in  February  1809> 
only  one  small  vessel  has  been  lost  on  this  coast. 

Mr.  Evans,  an  old  sea-captain,  has  the  chief  management  of  the  concerns  of  the  light- 
house, and  is  Lord  of  the  Island,  on  the  taming  and  improving  of  which  he  has  bestowed 
much  of  his  time  and  ingenuity.  He  makes  it  quite  his  hobby,  and  seems  to  look  upon  it 
as  the  great  pride  and  pleasure  of  his  life.  We  were  very  much  pleased  with  his  honest, 

E  E  open, 


208  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

open,  seaman-like  character,  and  entirely  went  along  with  the  satisfaction,  or  rather  exulta- 
tion, with  which  he  pointed  out  to  us  his  bridge,  and  several  other  additions,  both  for 
use  and  show,  which  he  has  grafted  upon  this  rude  rock.  He  has  his  laws;  one  of  which 
excludes  from  the  island  all  those  who  are  known  to  destroy  the  gulls,  or  despoil  their 
nests.  The  gulls  frequent  this  part  of  the  promontory  in  great  numbers,  and  they  give  so 
much  character  to  the  scenery,  that  travellers  in  search  of  the  picturesque  will  be  the  last 
to  object  to  this  charitable  edict  in  their  favour.  Mr.  Evans  considers  them  as  a  part  of 
his  family-establishment  on  the  island  ;  and,  like  every  thing  else  in  any  degree  connected 
with  it,  they  partake  of  his  fondness  and  protection.  Those  who  destroy  them,  do  it 
more  for  sport  than  profit ;  so  that  compliance  with  the  law  demands  no  very  dear 
sacrifice. 

The  two  men  who  have  the  charge  of  lighting  and  watching  the  lamps  have  a  neat 
comfortable  cottage  on  the  island,  and  a  small  garden  adjoining,  so  called,  rather  in  ex- 
pectation of  what  it  may  one  day  produce,  than  with  a  regard  to  its  present  circum- 
stances. In  gales  from  the  south  and  west  a  heavy  spray  washes  over  the  summit  of 
the  island,  and  prevents  the  growth  of  any  copious  vegetation;  but  the  garden  has 
already  gone  the  length  of  bringing  forth  two  or  three  bushels  of  cabbages.  One  of  the 
men  has  a  wife  who  has  filled  the  cottage  with  children  ;  and  the  whole  establishment  pre- 
sented a  scene  of  social  life  and  domestic  comfort,  combining  only  ordinary  circumstances, 
but  which,  in  this  wild,  cheerless,  and  exposed,  place,  excited  in  our  minds  an  unusual  in- 
terest. A  year  or  two  ago  this  little  family  were  narrowly  preserved  from  a  very  terrible 
calamity.  The  children  had  wandered  from  the  house  to  play,  and  scrambled  into  a  small 
cart,  lying  near  the  east  end  of  the  island,  which  slopes  rapidly  down  to  the  edge  of  the 
cliff:  by  romping  about  they  put  the  cart  in  motion,  when,  from  some  sudden  and  strange 
impulse,  for  they  were  not  alarmed  or  aware  of  their  danger,  they  all  jumped  out,  and 
escaped  just  before  it  was  precipitated  over  the  cliff  and  dashed  to  atoms.  A  wall  has  been 
since  built  along  the  edge  of  the  precipice  at  this  end  of  the  island,  but  every  other  side  of 
it  is  unguarded,  and  it  is  still  a  most  perilous  play-ground  for  children. 

We  returned  to  Holyhead  by  land.  The  ascent  to  the  summit  of  the  Head  is  ex- 
ceedingly grand.  This  part  of  it  facing  the  island  projects  considerably  from  the  line  of 
coast  to  the  right,  forming  a  precipice  with  two  sides.  The  steps  winding  up  the  steep 
face  in  front  lead,  in  some  of  their  bends,  close  to  the  edge  of  the  precipice  to  the  right; 
but  all  danger,  and  all  apprehension  of  it  from  that  quarter,  are  prevented  by  a  wall.  When 
nearly  at  the  top  we  looked  over  this  wall,  and  had  our  heads  hanging  over  a  perpendi- 
cular fall  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  From  this  spot  we  had  a  most  magnificent  view 
of  the  remaining  front  of  the  Head.  In  the  recess,  immediately  to  our  left,  it  formed  a  per- 
pendicular precipice  as  black  as  ink,  and  still  soaring  above  us,  and  from  thence  descended 
very  abruptly  to  its  southern  termination  in  broken  and  tremendous  masses  of  rock,  ex- 
hibiting the  most  awful  scene  of  ruin  that  can  be  conceived.  From  its  southern  extre- 
mity 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  209 

mity  to  the  entrance  of  the  strait  which  separates  the  island  from  Anglesey,  the  coast  is 
low,  but  still  rocky,  and  deeply  indented.  In  one  of  the  creeks  there  is  a  good  landing- 
place,  in  which  the  passengers  from  the  Dublin  packets  are  frequently  put  ashore,  and, 
in  certain  states  of  the  tide  and  wind,  are  rescued  from  three  or  four  hours  of  further 
beating  and  buffeting  for  the  harbour.  Notice  of  their  approach  is  conveyed  by  signal 
to  the  town,  and  chaises  are  always  in  readiness  on  the  spot  to  receive  them. 

On  reaching  the  top  of  the  cliff  there  was  still  extended  before  us  nothing  but  a 
savage  waste  of  craggy  and  weather-beaten  rocks.  We  ascended  with  some  difficulty 
to  the  highest  point  of  the  mountain,  called  Pen  y  Gaer  Gybi,  which  is  seven  hundred 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  This  elevation  would  scarcely  give  it  the  rank  of  a 
mountain  in  Caernarvonshire,  but  it  towers  with  great  majesty  above  the  flat  and  insipid 
scenery  of  Anglesey.  The  summit  rises  in  numerous  and  abrupt  points,  the  terminations 
of  the  huge  vertical  strata  of  schistus,  rent  and  shattered  into  horribly  jagged  forms.  In 
places  the  rocks  lie  scattered  about  in  ruinous  heaps,  and  here  and  there  a  single  slab  is 
protruded  through  the  soil,  and  stands  up  like  a  rude  monument.  The  lower  part  of  Pen  y 
Gaer  Gybi  has  been  surrounded  by  an  immense  dry  wall,  an  ancient  British  fortification. 
Most  of  it  is  broken  down  and  confounded  with  the  debris  from  the  mountain,  but  the 
whole  may  still  be  traced.  Parts  of  it  are  quite  entire,  and  are  nine  or  ten  feet  high,  and 
twelve  feet  thick.  We  found  the  approaches  exceedingly  difficult,  though  meeting  with 
no  resistance  but  from  the  rocks,  and,  with  nothing  like  glory  before  our  eyes,  considered 
it  as  perfectly  impracticable  to  scale  the  wall.  There  is  an  open  space  on  one  side  for  the 
entrance,  but  no  indications  of  the  means  by  which  it  was  defended.  In  the  inclosed 
space  there  are  no  remains  of  buildings  of  any  kind,  and  I  imagine  that  the  fortress  was 
never  permanently  garrisoned,  but  was  a  place  of  only  occasional  refuge,  to  which  the 
natives  fled  with  their  cattle  upon  any  sudden  alarm. 

We  next  made  our  way  to  the  signal-house,  which  stands  on  a  point  of  the  moun- 
tain immediately  overlooking  the  sea,  and  very  little  lower  than  Pen  y  Gaer  Gybi.  The 
view  down  the  precipice  was  terribly  grand,  and  we  felt  it  from  head  to  foot.  The  vast 
depth  of  the  abyss  was  more  fully  explained  by  the  diminished  forms  of  a  large  flight 
of  gulls,  which  were  wheeling,  dipping,  and  floating,  in  the  air,  two  or  three  hundred  feet 
below  us.  The  signal-house  is  a  small,  neat  cottage,  built,  with  a  very  innocent  ambition, 
in  the  form  of  a  circular  tower,  with  an  embattled  parapet.  A  man  and  his  wife  reside  in 
it,  who  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  keep  a  good  look  out,  but  this  they  must  do  from 
morning  till  night.  The  station  was  established  for  the  sake  of  a  communication  with  the 
packets  at  sea.  They  are  seen  at  a  great  distance  from  this  eminence,  and  notice  of  their 
approach  is  always  communicated  by  signal  to  the  town,  and  is  frequently  of  great 
importance.  When  a  packet  is  known  to  be  in  sight,  the  coach  is  sometimes  delayed  for 
an  hour  or  two,  till  the  vessel  arrives  in  the  harbour,  and  the  mail  thus  gains  a  day's  post. 
At  a  short  distance  to  the  northward  of  the  signal-house  we  observed  the  remains  of 

E  E  2  a  chapel, 


210  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

a  chapel,  Capel  Llochwyd,  consisting  only  of  a  small  portion  of  the  walls.  It  appears  to 
have  been  a  substantial  building,  but  of  very  rude  construction.  Superstition,  of  course, 
had  sovereign  sway  when  a  chapel  was  raised  in  a  situation  so  wild  and  desolate.  Lloch- 
wyd was  a  saint,  of  whose  birth  and  life  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  any  particulars,  but 
he  left  no  mean  degree  of  fame  behind  him,  and  presided  over  this  little  temple  with  un- 
abated credit  till  within  the  last  half  century.  The  ceremony  that  was  thought  necessary 
towards  conciliating  his  kind  offices  was  exceedingly  arduous,  and  few  were  found  that 
could  accomplish  it.  Close  to  the  chapel  there  is  a  curious  rent  in  the  mountain,  not 
more  than  twenty  feet  in  width,  but  winding  down  from  the  summit  to  the  sea.  The 
sides  are  quite  perpendicular,  but  the  front  slopes  down,  though  with  a  very  steep 
descent.  At  the  bottom  was  once  a  holy  well,  to  which  the  votaries  of  the  saint  repaired 
on  the  25th  of  July,  and  on  three  Sundays  following  it ;  and  if  any  individual,  the  slave 
of  wishes,  a  young  unmarried  woman,  for  instance,  could  ascend  to  the  chapel  with  her 
hands  full  of  sand,  and  her  mouth  full  of  water,  a  husband  was  the  consequence.  There 
was  a  raised  stone  in  the  centre  of  the  chapel,  on  which  the  sand  was  thrown  and  the 
water  spitten,  and  the  triumph  was  then  complete.  This  whimsical  superstition  was  sub- 
dued about  fifty  years  ago,  principally  by  the  authority  of  a  Mr.  Ellis,  a  leader  of  the 
Evangelical  faction,  and  a  singularly  morose  disciplinarian,  though  represented  to  me  as  a 
very  good  man.  If  he  saw  a  young  man  and  woman  courting,  and  walking  together  arm 
in  arm,  he  would  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands,  or  a  great  stick,  as  my  informant  de- 
clared, and  instantly  part  them.  There  was  formerly  a  fair  held  at  the  town  of  Holyhead 
in  commemoration  of  St.  Llochwyd,  the  chief  amusement  of  which  was  dancing :  a  guinea 
was  the  reward  of  the  woman  who  could  hold  out  the  longest ;  and  some  of  the  candidates 
for  this  prize  did  not  yield  till  they  fainted  with  fatigue.  But  all  this  kind  of  merriment 
was  knocked  down  by  the  great  stick  of  Mr.  Ellis,  and  the  town's-people  have  now 
adopted  that  demure  deportment  which  they  are  taught  to  believe  cannot  be  relaxed 
without  sin.  As  jumping  is  a  permitted  exercise  in  their  new  style  of  devotion,  they  re- 
signed, perhaps,  their  old  sports  with  the  more  complacency. 

I  did  not  leave  the  precincts  of  the  chapel  without  attempting  to  descend  down  the 
chasm  ;  but,  when  within  about  thirty  feet  of  the  bottom,  I  found  that  the  path  termi- 
nated in  a  broken  precipice  utterly  impassable,  even  with  lungs  and  limbs  at  perfect 
liberty.  There  has  been  a  recent  fall  of  the  rocks,  I  was  told,  which  thus  cut  short  the 
pass  and  buried  the  well.  Having  done  all  that  a  man  could  reasonably  be  expected  to 
do,  and  fully  gratified  my  curiosity,  I  returned  and  proceeded  to  look  atacarne  not  far  from 
the  chapel.  It  consists  of  a  copped  heap  of  stones,  at  least  thirty  tons,  as  is  supposed, 
thrown  up  on  the  summit  of  a  natural  pile  of  rocks  which  is  accessible  only  on  one  side. 
It  was  opened  a  few  years  ago,  and  I  was  informed  that  a  stone  coffin  with  bones  and 
some  brass  rings  in  it  was  discovered,  but  my  reporter  could  not  refer  me  to  any  positive 
proof  of  the  fact.  I  have  never  heard  before  of  any  thing  but  urns  being  found  in  carnes, 

and 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  211 

and  I  have  seen  several  which  were  taken  from  carnes  in  Anglesey.  They  were  made  of 
clay,  slightly  baked,  and  were  all  of  the  rudest  possible  workmanship.  One  of  them  con- 
tained some  bones,  not  apparently  touched  by  fire,  though  the  body,  no  doubt,  was  burned 
before  they  were  separated.  Carnes  are  included  among  the  reputed  works  of  the 
Druids,  and  are  considered  to  have  been  their  grand  altars.  Some  of  them  are  crowned 
with  flat  stones,  and  on  these,  it  is  said,  sacrificial  fires  were  lighted  at  certain  times  of 
the  year,  particularly  on  the  eves  of  the  first  of  May  and  the  first  of  November,  when 
the  whole  people  extinguished  their  domestic  fires,  and  rekindled  them  from  the  sacred 
flames  on  the  carnes.  There  is  something,  at  least,  very  grand  and  impressive  in  this 
universal  confederacy  in  one  solemn  act  of  religion,  but  where  are  we  to  look  for  au- 
thority? The  tombs  of  those  distinguished  for  virtue,  wisdom,  or  valour,  might  have  been 
used  as  altars ;  but  I  have  already  given  my  reasons  for  doubting  that  such  monuments 
were  Druidical. 

We  descended  down  the  eastern  side  of  the  mountain.  There  are  a  few  rude  and 
weather-worn  cottages  scattered  about  on  its  skirts,  in  which  there  live  some  people  of 
very  great  age,  whose  hardihood  has  gained  for  the  mountain  air  the  credit  of  being  re- 
markably healthy.  On  our  way  home  we  met  one  of  them,  an  old  man  of  eighty-six,  with 
a  clear  ruddy  countenance,  who  regularly  employs  himself,  during  the  whole  morning,  in 
cutting  furze  and  fern  ;  carries  his  load  on  his  head  two  miles  and  a  half  to  the  town;  sells 
it  for  what  he  can  get,  and  then  returns  fresh  and  lively  as  we  saw  him.  The  simplicity 
of  their  food,  and  the  regularity  of  their  lives,  tend,  I  imagine,  as  much  as  the  wholesome- 
ness  of  the  air,  to  give  them  health  and  long  life.  They  never  eat  flesh,  or  drink  spirits,  or 
ale,  but  live  entirely  on  barley  bread,  milk,  potatoes,  and  herrings.  They  are  very  poor; 
but,  if  they  earn  little,  they  are  not  worn  down  by  immoderate  labour,  and  suffer  less  from 
short  meals  than  they  would  from  excesses  at  the  public-house.  On  leaving  the  moun- 
tain we  found  nothing  further  in  the  island  to  engage  our  attention,  but,  altogether,  we 
had  been  as  much  entertained  by  our  day's  excursion,  as  by  any  scene  of  our  whole 
voyage. 

After  the  close  of  this  day,  a  sudden  alteration  in  the  weather  from  summer  to 
winter  checked  our  further  progress,  and  kept  us  prisoners  at  Holyhead.  During  this  in- 
terval of  rest  I  became  acquainted  with  an  entertaining  character,  who  completely  re- 
lieved me  from  that  discontent  which  is  apt  to  creep  upon  one  in  a  strange  place,  under 
a  cloudy  sky.  With  many  matters  of  information  connected  with  his  neighbourhood,  he 
combined  some  amusing  details  relating  to  a  far  distant  detachment  of  his  brethren,  the 
descendants  of  the  followers  of  Madoc,  a  hero,  who,  if  he  has  wanted  an  historian,  has 
been  crowned  by  a  poet.  The  subject,  I  confess,  was  somewhat  novel  to  me,  except  as 
illustrated  in  the  splendid  descriptions  of  Mr.  Southey ;  as  mere  matter  of  fact,  it  had 
made  but  little  impression  upon  my  curiosity,  and  less  upon  my  faith.  I  had  been  ac- 
customed to  consider  the  voyages  of  Madoc,  made  without  card  or  compass  over  the 

Western 


212  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

Western  Ocean,  in  much  the  same  light  as  the  launch  of  Merlin  with  his  brother  bards  in 
his  House  of  Glass.  But  I  found  from  communications  which  I  received  at  Hotyhead, 
and  at  other  places  in  Wales  where  I  was  afterwards  induced  to  apply  for  instruction, 
that  my  opinion  Avas  deemed  quite  a  heresy,  and  that  I  had  permitted  distrust  to  grow 
up  in  my  mind  concerning  facts  which  many  conceived  to  be  as  clear,  except  to  purblind 
prejudice,  as  the  sun  at  noon-day.  There  were  some  exceptions,  however,  to  the  general 
decision  against  me;  and  one  or  two,  on  whose  judgment  I  am  much  inclined  to  rely, 
shook  their  heads  very  significantly  at  some  particulars  which  I  am  now  about  to  record. 
In  the  summer  of  1794,  a  Mr.  John  Evans,  fully  satisfied  in  his  own  mind  that  the  story 
of  Madoc  was  founded  in  truth,  determined  to  expose  it  at  once  to  the  conviction  of  the 
world.  There  were  no  means  of  doing  this  so  conclusively  as  by  hunting  out  the  present 
race  of  Welsh  Indians;  and  for  this  express  and  sole  purpose  he  left  his  native  home,  and 
followed  up  the  pursuit  with  a  spirit  and  perseverance  that  would  have  done  honour  to 
the  great  Madoc  himself.  He  met  with  a  very  friendly  reception  in  the  United  States, 
but,  in  the  course  of  his  peregrinations,  was  kidnapped  by  the  Spaniards  and  thrown  into 
prison  at  St.  Louis,  from  whence  he  was  delivered  at  the  intercession  of  an  American  gen- 
tleman who  had  known  him  at  Philadelphia.  In  his  search  after  the  Indians  he  travelled 
down  the  Ohio  from  Pittsburgh  to  its  junction  with  the  Mississippi,  a  distance  of  eleven 
hundred  miles:  he  then  passed  up  the  Mississippi,  and  branched  off  to  the  Missouri,  up 
which  he  advanced  five  hundred  miles,  when  he  was  stopped  by  the  hostilities  of  tribes  in 
his  route.  Matters,  however,  were  soon  quiet  again,  and  he  continued  his  course  up  the 
Missouri  for  three  hundred  miles  further,  when,  from  some  circumstances,  his  courage 
abated,  and  he  gave  up  the  pursuit,  retraced  his  steps  to  the  Mississippi,  turned  seaward, 
and  arrived  safe  and  sound  at  New  Orleans.  He  here  related  his  adventures,  and  the 
object  of  them,  to  the  Spanish  governor,  who  was  mightily  pleased  with  him,  and  earnestly 
recommended  him  to  make  another  attempt,  promising  him,  at  the  same  time,  attendants, 
and  every  other  assistance  that  could  make  his  journey  easy  and  comfortable  to  him. 
What  might  have  been  the  result  of  so  much  zeal  there  is  no  knowing,  for,  unhappily, 
before  Mr.  Evans  was  able  to  renew  his  expedition,  he  caught  a  fever  and  died.  I  have 
conversed  with  several  who  knew  him,  and  who  related  to  me,  from  his  letters,  the  few  cir- 
cumstances of  his  American  travels  that  I  have  mentioned.  They  had  no  doubt  but  that, 
had  he  been  permitted  to  live,  his  exertions  would  have  been  ultimately  crowned  with  suc- 
cess, and  regretted  much  that  the  fame  of  Madoc  had  lost  so  enthusiastic  a  supporter. 

But  chance  often  brings  to  light  that  which  no  ardour  and  constancy  of  research 
could  discover;  and  a  thing  lost  or  concealed  will,  after  having  long  resisted  all  peering  and 
prying,  sometimes  pop  upon  us  from  some  unthought  of  place,  and  at  a  moment  when 
it  was  altogether  out  of  our  minds.  In  the  year  1801,  Mr.  Roberts,  a  Welshman,  was 
sitting  in  a  public-house  in  the  city  of  Washington,  and,  as  fortune  would  have  it,  in  the 
same  room  with  an  Indian  chief.  Thus  situated,  he  called  for  a  glass  of  brandy  and 

water, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  213 

water,  cold,  and  probably  without  sugar.  Now  the  waiter,  though  likewise  a  Welshman, 
perfidiously  enough  brought  him  his  drink  hot,  which  provoked  him  extremely,  and  he 
gave  utterance  to  the  sudden  indignation  of  his  heart  in  his  native  language,  and  in  terms 
to  this  effect :  By  the  devil,  I'll  drub  thee !  The  exclamation  had  scarcely  passed  his  lips 
when  the  Indian  chief but  I  have  the  story  in  his  own  words,  and  it  is  a  pity  to  dis- 
guise them.  On  his  return  to  his  own  country  he  wrote  an  account  of  this  single  adven- 
ture in  America,  and  published  it  in  a  Welsh  miscellaneous  work,  called  '  Greal/  which 
signifies  Gruel.  I  got  the  greater  part  of  this  article  translated  for  me,  and,  as  I  believe 
that  it  has  never  before  appeared  in  an  English  dress,  I  set  it  down  for  the  entertainment 
of  the  reader. 

"  In  the  year  1801,  when  I  was  in  the  city  of  Washington,  in  America,  it  happened 
that  I  was  in  a  public-house,  smoking  my  pipe,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  country. 
There  was  a  Welsh  lad  as  a  servant  in  the  house,  and,  in  consequence  of  his  displeasing  me, 
by  bringing  me  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water  hot  instead  of  cold,  I  said  to  him  in  anger, 
By  the  devil,  I'll  drub  thee!  Now  it  happened,  at  the  same  time,  that  there  was  in  the 
same  room  one  of  the  inferior  princes  of  the  Indians,  who  hastily  came  up  to  me,  and, 
stretching  forth  his  hand,  asked,  in  the  Welsh  language — Is  that  thy  language? — I  an- 
swered, shaking  hands,  in  the  affirmative;  and  he  then  declared  that  it  was  his,  also,  and 
not  only  that  of  his  father  and  mother,  but  also  of  his  whole  nation.  Such  is  my  language, 
said  I,  and  such  the  language  of  my  ancestors.  Then  the  Indian  asked  me  from  whence 
I  came  :  I  answered,  from  Wales;  but  he  said  that  he  had  never  heard  of  such  a  place. 
I  told  him  that  Wales  was  a  principality  of  a  kingdom  called  England  :  he  had  heard  of 
England  and  Englishmen,  but  not  a  syllable  about  Wales.  I  asked  him  whether  there 
were  any  traditions  among  his  tribe  concerning  the  place  from  whence  his  ancestors 
came.  He  answered,  that  there  were  ;  that  they  had  come  from  a  distant  country,  far  in 
the  east,  and  over  the  great  deep.  I  conversed  with  him  in  Welsh  and  in  English,  and 
found  that  he  talked  Welsh  better  than  myself.  He  reckoned  from  one  to  upwards  of  a 
hundred,  immediately  upon  my  asking  him :  his  English  was  also  very  good,  for  he  had 
had  full  opportunities  of  becoming  acquainted  with  that  language  by  constantly  trading 
with  merchants  of  America.  Among  many  other  things,  I  asked  him  how  his  tribe  had 
preserved  their  language  so  free  from  intermixture  with  that  of  other  tribes.  He  an- 
swered, that  they  had  a  law  which  ordained,  that  no  parents  should  teach  their  children 
any  other  language  till  they  were  twelve  years  of  age,  when  they  were  at  liberty  to  learn 
what  they  pleased.  I  asked  him  if  he  wished  to  visit  England  and  Wales,  but  he  said 
that  he  had  no  inclination  to  leave  his  native  land,  and  that  he  preferred  living  in  a  kind 
of  wigwam  to  a  palace.  His  arms  were  adorned  with  bracelets,  and  on  his  head  were 
ostrich  feathers.  I  was  surprised  at  seeing  such  a  man  with  an  European  face ;  a  man  so 
like  an  Indian  in  many  respects,  yet  talking  in  the  venerable  Welsh  language  as  scienti- 
fically as  if  he  had  been  born  and  bred  among  the  rocks  of  Snowdou.  His  head  was 

shaved, 


214  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

shaved,  excepting  a  small  spot  on  the  crown,  where  the  ostrich  feathers  were  placed. 
These  Indians  inhabit  a  country  eight  hundred  miles  south-west  of  Philadelphia,  and  they 
are  called,  in  general,  by  the  name  of  Asgwas.  This  prince  was  partial  to  my  company, 
particularly  as  we  came  from  the  same  nation.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  calling  upon  me 
very  frequently,  and  taking  me  to  the  woods,  to  shew  me  certain  leaves  which  were  good 
for  all  kinds  of  diseases,  for  his  nation  derive  all  their  physic  from  trees,  &c.  &c." 

The  translator  was  here  interrupted,  and  I  could  not  press  him  to  renew  his  task ; 
but  he  had  come  nearly  to  the  end  of  the  story,  and,  in  a  subsequent  conversation  of  a 
few  minutes,  informed  me  that  the  remainder  contained  no  further  discoveries  of  im- 
portance. Mr.  Roberts  continued,  during  a  fortnight,  to  be  the  constant  companion  of 
the  Indian  prince,  and,  over  fresh  glasses  of  brandy  and  water,  still  grew  in  his  good 
graces;  but,  not  being  able  to  overcome  his  loyal  attachment  to  his  country  and  his  wig- 
wam, was  finally  obliged  to  tear  himself  away  from  him,  and  we  hear  no  more  of  him. 
I  had  been  promised  the  pleasure  of  an  interview  with  Mr.  Roberts,  but,  on  making  en- 
quiries for  him  in  London,  where  he  had  latterly  resided,  I  found  that  he  had  been  dead 
for  some  time.  He  has  been  described  to  me  by  several  of  his  friends  and  countrymen, 
as  a  plain,  respectable  man,  becomingly  national,  but  not  fonder  of  Wales  than  of  truth. 
On  a  subject,  however,  of  this  sort,  involving  so  many  circumstances  that  challenge  doubt 
and  suspicion,  the  unsupported  assertions  of  an  individual  are  not  sufficient  to  impress 
conviction,  and  more  particularly  as  he  has  failed  to  profit  by  abundant  opportunities  of 
backing  them  by  the  testimony  of  others.  If  we  put  the  individual  quite  out  of  the  ques- 
tion, and  judge  of  his  veracity  solely  from  the  evidence  of  his  narrative,  I  fear  that  a  ver- 
dict must  be  pronounced  against  him.  I  cannot,  nor  is  it  necessary  that  I  should,  pro- 
ceed soberly  to  work  in  marshalling  and  commenting  upon  the  improbabilities  of  his  story. 
How  happened  it  that  a  man  of  some  note  among  his  tribe,  like  this  Indian,  should  travel 
so  far  from  his  home  unattended?  or,  if  he  had  companions,  why  did  not  Mr.  Roberts 
advert  to  them  ?  He  mentions  that  his  friend  had  learned  to  talk  English  by  trading  with 
merchants  of  America,  and  others,  of  course,  of  the  tribe,  participated  in  the  same  com- 
munication; but  is  it  conceivable  that  a  people,  distinct  in  their  language  and  appearance 
from  all  the  known  inhabitants  of  America,  should  appear  as  traders  in  the  city  of  Wash- 
ington without  exciting  some  curiosity  and  enquiry,  and  that  the  denouement  of  their 
origin  should  have  been  thus  miraculously  mixed  up  by  a  Welsh  waiter  in  a  glass  of  brandy 
and  water  ?  The  scrupulous  attention  to  the  preservation  of  their  language  among  a 
people  living  in  wigwams,  and  who  had  given  up  their  coats  and  breeches,  and  every 
British  distinction  but  one;  and,  moreover,  their  singular  felicity  in  preserving  this  one 
free  from  the  lightest  touch  of  corruption  for  six  centuries,  I  barely  allude  to — In  short, 
without  wishing  to  indulge  in  any  extravagantly  sceptical  criticism,  I  consider  the  whole 
matter  as  a  fabrication,  and  I  should  scarcely  have  thought  this  solemn  decision  upon 
it  necessary,  had  it  not  been  very  seriously  recommended  to  my  notice  and  belief. 

I  do 


VOYAGE    UOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  215 

I  do  not,  by  any  means,  deny,  that  the  descendants  of  Madoc  and  his  followers  exist 
in  America,  but  I  certainly  think  that  they  are  yet  to  be  discovered.  It  is  supposed  by 
believers,  that  the  main  body  of  them  are  settled  high  up  the  Missouri,  higher  considerably 
than  Mr.  Evans  advanced.  By  referring  to  Arrowsmith's  map,  Lon.  107°,  W. — Lat.  37°, 
N.,  the  reader  will  see  a  tribe  marked  down  under  the  name  of  Padoucas,  and  these  are 
the  people,  it  is  said,  who  compose  the  grand  body  of  the  Welsh  Indians.  I  have  not 
heard  that  any  one,  either  before  or  since  the  attempt  of  Mr.  I.  Evans,  has  ascertained 
the  fact  by  positive  communication  with  the  people,  but  great  reliance  is  placed  on  their 
name.  The  Welsh  would  call  the  followers,  or  people  of  Madoc,  Madawcwys,  Madogion, 
Madocaintwys,  &c.,  names  which,  it  must  be  admitted,  bear  a  resemblance  to  Padoucas, 
though  we  might  be  justified,  indeed,  in  stickling  for  a  letter,  when  we  remember  that  Mr. 
Roberts's  illustrious  friend  in  the  public  house  talked  Welsh  "  as  scientifically  as  if  he  had 
been  born  and  bred  among  the  rocks  of  Snowdon."  There  was  some  authority,  no  doubt, 
for  determining  the  name  of  this  tribe,  and  putting  it  down  in  a  certain  place  on  the  map, 
but,  whatever  this  authority  was,  it  does  any  thing  rather  than  explain  their  Welsh  descent, 
for  it  has  mapped  them  as  Padoucas,  while  their  extraordinary  distinctions  are  yet  to  be 
proved.  The  Asgwas  are  supposed  to  form  a  much  less  considerable  settlement,  situ- 
ated on  the  eastern  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  in  about  W.  Lon.  85,  and  N.  Lat.  37-  Some- 
thing, I  fancy,  might  be  made  of  their  name,  but  the  direct  testimony  of  the  Indian  prince, 
(whose  name,  by  the  by,  I  wonder  that  Mr.  Roberts  should  have  omitted  to  reveal),  has 
foreclosed  all  ingenuity  on  this  subject.  The  Padoucas  truly  live  in  a  most  out-of-the- 
way  part  of  the  world,  but  this  smaller  tribe  are  so  accessible,  that  one  might  have  ex- 
pected that  the  patriotic  vanity,  which  is  so  flattered  by  the  reflected  honour  of  Madoc's 
discoveries,  would  have  endeavoured  to  establish  their  authenticity  on  less  questionable 
foundations. 

I  really  feel  quite  abashed  when  I  look  back  to  the  length  of  my  discussions  on  these 
Trans-Atlantic  affairs,  and  advert  to  the  unconscionable  distance  to  which  I  have  strayed 
from  my  proper  course:  voyage  within  voyage  is,  no  doubt,  more  than  the  reader  had 
made  up  his  account  for,  and  I  must  apologize  for  so  trespassing  upon  his  patience. 

After  the  delay  of  two  days  at  Holyhead,  the  sky  still  continued  dark  and  threatening: 
it  was  now  near  the  middle  of  October ;  the  wind  had  set  in  from  the  south-west,  and 
there  appeared  no  prospect  of  a  speedy  change  in  the  weather ;  we  therefore  determined 
to  defer  any  further  prosecution  of  our  voyage  till  the  next  summer,  and  returned  to 
London. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


F  F 


ERRATA. 

Page  Line 

12,         1,  for  eye,  read  use. 

18,  12,  for  l,200/.,read  12.000/. 

— ,  30,   for  Porlneath,  read  Portrealh. 

4t<,         ],  for  tow,  read  town. 

78,  24,  for  iurned  and  built,  read  luift  and  innuJ. 

83,  37,  for  is  an  excellent,  read  is  in  an  excellent. 
llg,         (j,  for  having,  read  Aavt. 

l'J2,  ly,  for  summits,  read  summit. 

IC6,         5,  for  eastward  of  the  east,  read  westward  of  the  tvc*l. 

Ii7,  34,  after  patriotism,  place  a  comma. 
130,        3,  after  it,  place  a  comma. 
145,         3,  for  vessels,  read  vessel. 

— ,  39,  for  colected,  read  collected. 

148,  18,  for  5am,  read  5oru. 

149,  24,   for  Afre,  read  there. 

166,  37,  for  mos/,  read  r/u.(. 


VOYAGE 

ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN, 

UNDERTAKEN  IN  THE  SUMMER  OF  THE  YEAR  1813, 

AND  COMMENCING  FROM  THE  LAND'S-END,  CORNWALL, 
BY  RICHARD  AYTON. 


WITH 


A   SERIES   OF  VIEWS, 

of  tfje  Character  antr  prominent  ^features  of  tf)e  Coast 


DRAWN  AND  ENGRAVED 


BY  WILLIAM  DANIELL,  A.R.A. 


VOL.  II. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED    FOR    LONGMAN,    HURST,    REES,    ORME,    AND    BROWN,    PATERNOSTER-ROW 
AND  WILLIAM  DANIELL,  NO.   9,  CLEVELAND-STREET,  FITZROY-SQUARE. 

1815. 


VOYAGE 
ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN,  &c. 


WE  left  London  late  in  July,  1814,  and  prepared  ourselves  again  for  the  solitude  of 
rocks  and  waves,  while  the  rival  fleets  were  at  the  point  of  battle  on  the  Serpentine,  and 
the  Temple  and  the  Pagoda,  and  all  the  toys  of  the  Park,  were  just  rising  to  their  con- 
summation. To  have  lived  in  such  times,  and  not  have  witnessed  the  general  explosion  of 
this  royal  show,  may  well  be  regretted  as  a  misfortune;  but  we  soothed  ourselves  by  re- 
membering that  we  shared  our  loss  with  high  company,  and  felt,  perhaps,  an  ill-natured 
satisfaction  in  knowing  that  the  great  potentates  of  Europe,  for  whose  entertainment  these 
magnificent  preparations  were  mainly  designed,  would  not  see  a  single  squib.  Add  to 
such  topics  of  consolation,  that  we  returned  to  the  metropolis  in  time  to  see  the  whole 
materials,  the  Pagoda  and  Temple,  with  their  furniture,  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  the 
King  of  Prussia,  &c.  all  fully  appreciated  under  the  hammer  of  the  auctioneer,  and  it 
will  appear  that  we  are  not  to  be  ranked  among  the  most  unlucky  of  men. 

We  arrived  at  Holyhead  on  the  3 1st,  where  I  observed  nothing  to  add  to  my  former 
description.  Having  devoted  a  day  to  the  romantic  scenery  of  the  Head,  we  took  a  boat 
and  sailed  to  the  Skerries,  islands  lying  off  the  northern  point  of  the  bay.  There  was 
little  to  engage  particular  observation  during  the  passage.  The  coast  all  round  the  bay 
is  rocky  antf  broken,  but  very  low,  except  at  the  two  boundaries  south  and  north,  the 
Head,  and  Carnell's  Point.  The  shore  on  all  sides  is  rendered  dangerous  by  the  frequent 
projection  of  long,  sharp  ledges  of  rock,  and  by  detached  fragments  which  are  thickly 
scattered  about  for  an  extent  of  several  hundred  feet  from  the  land.  To  the  boats  of  the 
fishermen  these  are  formidable  obstructions,  but  they  are  out  of  the  track  of  larger  vessels, 
which,  if  they  are  driven  in  by  stress  of  weather,  have  a  good  harbour  open  to  receive 
them.  We  had  a  wide  view  of  the  inland  country  of  Anglesey  extended  round  in  a  dis- 
mal succession  of  brown  and  naked  fields,  but  far  beyond  it  appeared  the  blue  mountains 

B  2  of 


4  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT     BRITAIN. 

of  Caernarvonshire,  with  their  connecting  ridges  lost  in  the  distance,  and  their  summits 
only  discovered  in  insulated  peaks  above  the  horizon. 

A  fair  wind  and  tide  speedily  brought  us  to  the  Skerries,  where  we  arrived  at  the 
same  time  with  another  boat  laden  with  provisions  for  the  island,  and  our  combined 
crews,  in  the  bustle  of  landing,  made  up  a  concert  of  human  voices,  such  as  the  inha- 
bitants had  not  often  heard  on  their  wild  and  dreary  domain.  The  sea-fowl,  alarmed 
by  our  invasion,  sprang  from  the  rocks,  and,  filling  the  air  with  their  numbers,  joined  with 
their  harsh  cries  in  the  general  clamour.  The  landing-place  was  any  thing  rather  than 
commodious,  but  fine  weather  made  it  perfectly  safe,  and  a  little  difficulty  composes  a 
part  of  the  pleasure  of  these  kind  of  excursions. 

The  Skerries  lie  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  main  land.  They 
consist  of  two  islands  Avith  smaller  rocks,  thirteen  in  number,  scattered  about  them.  The 
principal  island  is  rather  less  than  a  mile  in  circumference,  and  is  separated  from  its  sub- 
ordinate islet  by  a  sound  eighty  or  a  hundred  yards  in  breadth.  They  are  both  covered 
in  parts  with  earth  bearing  a  short,  brown  herbage,  which,  in  the  summer  season,  keeps 
alive  a  dozen  sheep.  Nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  larger  island  there  is  a  remarkable 
mount  seventy  feet  in  height,  and  gradually  diminishing  towards  the  top.  On  one  side 
it  has  a  perpendicular  face  of  naked  rock,  divided  into  huge  square  blocks,  which  look  as 
if  they  had  been  piled  together  by  the  hands  of  man.  The  rock  is  schistus,  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  of  the  whole  coast  of  Holyhead  Bay.  On  the  summit  of  the  mount  is  a 
light-house,  a  very  necessary  guide  for  vessels  entering  the  bay  from  the  northward 
and  eastward.  The  lantern  is  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  On 
a  smaller  eminence  adjoining,  the  men  light  a  fire,  as  a  private  signal,  when  they  want 
assistance  of  any  kind  from  Holyhead.  Every  other  part  of  the  island  is  very  low,  and 
lies  dreadfully  exposed  to  the  sea.  In  the  violent  winter  gales  the  men  scarcely  dare  put 
their  heads  out  of  doors,  and  with  difficulty  crawl  up,  on  their  hands  and  knees,  to  the 
light-house.  The  tide  runs  among  these  islands  and  rocks  with  the  violence  of  a  mill- 
race,  and,  with  strong  winds,  throws  the  sea  into  the  wildest  confusion.  The  islands  are 
accessible  only  by  boats,  and  these  venture  to  approach  only  in  the  finest  weather ;  for  a 
breeze  that  would  be  considered  quite  moderate  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  them,  is 
sufficient,  when  acting  against  these  furious  currents,  to  force  up  a  dangerous  sea.  The 
tide  runs  with  nearly  equal  rapidity,  and,  in  gales  of  wind,  there  is  the  same  confused  and 
broken  sea,  in  the  Avhole  channel  between  the  Skerries  and  Carnell's  Point,  for  the  bottom 
is  one  connected  reef  of  rugged  rocks.  A  large  cluster  of  them,  called  the  Platters,  appear 
in  spots  at  low  water,  and  are  fearful  obstructions  in  the  way  of  vessels. 

Two  men  with  their  wives  live  upon  the  island,  and  have  each  a  cottage,  but  their 
domestic  establishment  is  regulated  on  a  very  different  system  from  that  which  had  so 
agreeably  impressed  upon  our  minds  the  comfort  and  contentment  of  the  little  family  on 
the  South  Stack.  One  of  the  men,  William  Morgan,  has  been  upon  the  island  thirty-four 

years ; 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  5 

years;  and  the  circumstances  of  his  melancholy  life,  during  this  period,  do  but  little  credit 
to  the  liberality  and  humanity  of  his  employer.  A  man  who  consents  to  linger  through 
his  days  in  this  lonely  place,  has  no  right  to  expect  many  of  the  enjoyments  of  life,  but 
old  Morgan  has  had  his  share  of  nothing  but  its  cares.  For  the  first  twelve  years  of  his 
service,  his  wages  were  14/L  per  annum,  out  of  which  he  paid  thirty  shillings  to  an  assistant, 
and  with  the  remainder  had  to  support  a  family.  He  described  to  me  his  condition  during 
this  period  as  bitterly  miserable.  His  pay  was  afterwards  advanced  to  201.  per  annum, 
at  Avhich  sum  it  continued  for  seven  years,  when  it  was  raised  to  SOL,  and  for  the  last  two 
years  it  has  been  40/.,  which  might  have  made  him  happy,  he  said,  had  it  been  given  in 
time.  But  his  former  vile  pittance  had  forced  him  into  debt,  which  he  had  no  hope  of  ever 
being  able  to  pay,  and  it  weighed  upon  his  peace,  he  said,  and  kept  him  in  constant 
trouble.  He  was  now  sixty-three  years  old,  but  he  looked  many  years  older.  The  tears 
frequently  came  to  his  eyes  as  he  talked  to  me,  and  there  was  an  expression  of  fixed  and 
extreme  wretchedness  in  his  countenance.  He  was  much  out  of  health,  and  declared  that 
he  was  perfectly  ready  to  die.  His  wife  was  about  the  same  age,  but  appeared  also  to  be 
sinking  under  premature  decay.  Their  allowance  of  provisions  is  as  poor  as  it  can  be : 
no  animal  food  of  any  kind  is  given  to  them,  except  sheep's  milk,  and  this  fails  them  in 
the  winter,  when  they  live  entirely  upon  tea,  barley  bread,  and  oatmeal.  Many  live  to  a 
great  age  on  such  food,  but  these  people  consider  it  as  very  hard  fare,  and,  looking  upon 
themselves  as  the  servants  of  a  gentleman,  think  that  they  are  entitled  to  be  less  scurvily 
fed.  Morgan  had  now  his  son  with  him,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  for,  being  sick,  he  could  not 
very  well  get  through  his  duty  without  assistance;  but  he  had  just  received  notice  that  his 
boy  eat  too  much,  and  must  be  dismissed.  He  will  not  much  longer  have  strength  to 
bear  the  cold  and  wet,  to  which  he  is  often  exposed,  and,  after  his  long  sufferings  on  this 
dismal  island,  will  probably  be  turned  away  at  last  to  die  in  a  poor-house.  I  have  not 
been  hastily  recording  the  repinings  of  a  discontented  man,  without  knowing  whether  they 
were  precisely  reasonable:  his  appearance,  and  his  manner  of  telling  his  story,  interested 
me  so  much,  that  I  made  particular  enquiries  on  the  subject  of  his  grievances,  and  found 
that  he  had  told  me  nothing  but  the  truth.  The  light-house  is  the  property  of  a  gentle- 
man residing  in  Cardiganshire,  and  yields  him  a  large  income.  He  has  possibly  no  know- 
ledge of  the  condition  of  these  poor  people,  or  he  might  spare  them  the  little  that  would 
make  them  content.  He  has  an  agent  at  Holyhead,  who,  perhaps,  gives  laws  to  the 
Skerries,  and  has  an  interest  in  ruling  the  whole  establishment  at  as  little  cost  as  possible. 
I  have  no  wish  to  speak  of  him  with  disrespect,  but  I  have  no  hesitation  in  recommending 
to  his  attention  a  little  charity.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  these  remarks  will  meet 
his  ears,  and  if  they  urge  him  to  make  the  latter  days  of  old  Morgan  and  his  wife  more 
comfortable  than  he  has  made  their  past  life,  I  shall  not  think  that  I  have  dwelt  upon 
their  humble  story  too  long. 

Griffith  Jones.,  the  companion  of  Morgan  on  the  Skerries,  was  a  much  younger  man, 

and 


O  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  had  lived  there  only  four  years,  but  his  appearance  did  not  speak  much  in  favour  of 
his  mode  of  life.  There  was  now  a  very  friendly  and  confidential  intercourse  between  the 
two  cottages,  but  it  was  not  always  so.  Griffith's  predecessor  had  a  wife  of  a  gay  temper, 
which  he  suspected  that  Morgan,  in  spite  of  his  years,  was  inclined  to  take  an  ungenerous 
advantage  of,  and,  with  this  preposterous  jealousy  in  his  mind,  was  always  beating  his 
wife  and  abusing  his  friend.  I  confess  that  I  at  once  acquitted  Morgan  of  any  levities  of 
this  nature,  but  the  poor  old  creature  was  very  earnest  in  his  defence,  and  protested  to 
me,  with  the  most  solemn  gravity,  that  such  wicked  thoughts  had  never  entered  his  head. 
But  the  suspicions  of  the  jealous  man  were  not  so  easily  to  be  subdued,  and  there  was  no 
peace  on  the  island  as  long  as  he  remained  upon  it.  The  women  employ  themselves  witli 
needle-work,  and  find  some  occupation  in  adjusting  the  little  affairs  of  the  household,  but 
the  men  saunter  about  from  morning  till  night  in  a  state  of  deplorable  dulness  and  in- 
activity. Fishing  was  formerly,  during  the  summer  seasons,  a  great  source  of  amusement 
to  them,  and  materially  improved  their  fare;  but,  about  eight  years  ago,  a  vessel  from 
Amlwch,  laden  with  copper  ore,  was  wrecked  upon  the  south-west  point  of  the  island, 
and,  since  that  time,  they  have  never  caught  a  fish.  Before  this  event,  fish  swarmed  in 
prodigious  multitudes  about  the  rocks,  and,  in  calm  evenings,  the  surface  of  the  sea,  be- 
tween and  around  the  islands,  appeared  alive  with  them.  They  were  chiefly  whiting  pol- 
lacks, cod,  and  cole-fish.  These  may  have  altogether  deserted  their  old  haunts,  but  there 
must  be  smaller  fish  not  far  from  the  islands,  or  sea-fowl  would  not  breed  upon  them. 
Along  the  shore  about  Amlwch,  where  water  impregnated  with  the  poison  from  copper  is 
constantly  mixing  with  the  sea,  no  fish  are  ever  caught. 

There  are  a  few  rabbits  on  the  Skerries,  but  these,  the  men  say,  they  can't  catch,  and 
a  few  pigeons,  and  these  they  won't  kill.  I  admired  their  tenderness  in  this  respect.  Two 
pigeons  flew  to  the  island  a  year  or  two  ago,  where  they  voluntarily  remained,  and  the 
people  (I  believe  that  there  was  something  of  superstition  in  the  case)  regarded  them  with 
great  affection.  They  have  since  increased  to  six,  and  may  in  time  so  multiply  as 
to  outrun  the  fondness  of  their  keepers,  and  they  may  have  a  pie  without  any  violence 
to  their  feelings.  They  were  formerly  infested  by  some  much  less  acceptable  company, 
vast  swarms  of  fleas,  which,  like  the  fish,  suddenly  disappeared.  They  were  so  numerous 
that  no  one  could  visit  the  island,  but  for  an  hour,  without  going  away  covered  with  them. 
Before  the  light-house  was  furnished  with  lamps,  the  light  was  produced  by  a  coal  fire, 
and  the  men  imagined  that  the  fleas  were  engendered  in  the  ashes,  which  they  always 
threw  down  the  side  of  the  mount.  Their  sole  reason  for  thus  thinking  was,  that,  after  the 
use  of  lamps,  they  saw  no  more  of  the  fleas. 

We  were  much  entertained  here  with  the  various  habits,  manners,  and  motions  of  the 
sea-fowl,  which  were  now  busy  with  their  young,  and  in  a  state  of  restlessness  and  agita- 
tion, compared  with  which  the  bustle  of  a  rookery  is  quite  peaceable  and  orderly.  They 
were  chiefly  Terns,  or  Sea-Swallows,  which,  though  not  so  loud,  are  fully  as  persevering 

in 


VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  7 

in  their  screams  as  the  Gulls.  They  continue  for  a  long  time  on  the  wing,  and  are  ex- 
ceedingly rapid  in  their  action,  skimming  and  darting  through  the  air  like  Land-Swallows, 
which  they  much  resemble  in  their  form.  When  we  approached  the  rocks  where  their 
young  were  settled,  numbers  of  them  assembled  about  us  with  redoubled  clamours,  hover- 
ing only  a  few  yards  above  us,  and  one  or  two,  more  bold  and  outrageous  than  the  rest, 
actually  bounced  against  our  heads.  The  female  lays  two  eggs  on  the  bare  rock,  and 
sits  upon  them  very  irregularly,  leaving  them  to  be  hatched  chiefly  by  the  heat  of  the  sun. 
The  Terns  first  appear  on  the  Skerries  early  in  the  summer,  and  depart  at  the  latter  end 
of  August. 

There  were  some  Puffins  on  the  island,  but  very  few,  there  being  but  a  scanty  supply 
of  earth  upon  it  for  their  accommodation.  On  their  first  arrival  they  dig  deep  holes  in  the 
ground,  in  which  they  lay  their  eggs,  though  they  avoid  all  unnecessary  trouble  in  this 
stage  of  their  necessities  by  dislodging  the  rabbits,  which  they  regularly  compel  to  change 
their  quarters.  The  task  of  forming  the  burrows  is  said  to  be  allotted  to  the  male  bird, 
who  is  so  intent  while  engaged  in  his  work,  that  he  will  suffer  himself  to  be  taken  with 
the  hand.  Griffith  conducted  us  to  their  settlement,  and  very  fearlessly  poked  his  arm 
up  to  the  shoulder  into  one  of  the  holes.  After  he  had  groped  about  for  a  few  seconds, 
we  had  reason  to  suspect,  from  a  sudden  distortion  in  his  countenance,  that  he  had  found 
and  felt  his  game,  and  he  instantly  withdrew  his  hand,  with  a  part  of  it  inclosed  in  the 
bird's  mouth,  as  in  a  lobster's  claw.  Had  not  his  skin  been  as  tough  as  leather,  he  would 
have  received  a  severe  wound,  and,  as  it  was,  he  did  not  escape  without  blood.  When 
the  bird's  mouth  was  forced  open,  I  incautiously  placed  a  finger  within  its  reach,  and  had 
a  bit  of  it  cut  away  as  cleanly  as  if  it  had  been  done  with  a  pair  of  scissars.  There  is 
something  very  grotesque  in  the  countenance  of  the  Puffin :  its  disproportioned  bill  looks 
like  a  thing  that  could  scarcely  belong  to  it  naturally,  and  reminds  one  of  a  face  with  a 
masquerade-nose  on.  The  eye  is  large,  and  over  it  there  is  a  small  black  mark,  a  kind  of 
eye-brow,  so  placed  as  to  give  it  a  very  melancholy  expression.  This  sedate  eye,  together 
with  its  monstrous  nose,  make  up  a  combination  of  character  that  is  exceedingly  ridi- 
culous*. Nothing  could  exceed  the  courage  and  determinacy  with  which  this  bird  de- 

*  The  following  more  minute  description  of  this  bird,  which,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  is  perfectly  correct,  I  have  ex- 
tracted from  Bewick. — "  The  Puffin  weighs  about  twelve  ounces,  and  measures  twelve  inches  in  length,  and  twenty-one 
in  breadth.  Its  singular  bill  looks  not  unlike  a  kind  of  .sheath  slipped  over  both  mandibles,  and,  from  its  appearance, 
the  bird  is  not  improperly  named  Coulterneb,  or  Knife-Bill.  At  the  base,  where  it  is  about  an  inch  and  a  half  in  depth,  it 
is  rimmed  with  a  white  callous  border,  the  two  corners  of  which  project  above  the  brow,  and  below  the  chin.  It  is  about 
the  same  in  length,  curved  towards  the  point,  compressed  vertically,  very  flat,  and  transversely  furrowed  on  the  sides ; 
the  half  of  it  adjoining  to  the  head  is  smooth,  and  of  a  fine  lead-coloured  blue ;  the  other  part,  to  the  tip,  red :  the 
nostrils  are  placed  in  long,  narrow  slits,  near  the  edge  of  the  bill :  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  when  closed,  are  curiously 
puckered,  and  form  a  kind  of  small  star,  or  rose :  the  eyes  are  protected  by  small  callous  protuberances,  both  above  and 
below:  the  edges  of  the  eye-lids  are  crimson:  irides  grey:  the  chin  and  cheeks  are  white,  bordered  with  grey:  the 
latter  much  puffed  up  with  feathers,  which  make  the  head  look  large  and  round.  From  behind  the  corner  of  each  eye 

fended 


8  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

fended  its  young :  it  seemed  to  have  no  care  for  its  own  safety,  and  when  we  put  it  down 
on  the  ground,  did  not  attempt  to  fly  away,  but  exerted  all  its  power  to  regain  possession 
of  its  hole.  Its  cry,  in  tone,  was  like  the  bleat  of  a  sheep,  and,  when  broken  with  rage, 
was  not  unlike  what  Mr.  Pennant  has  compared  it  with,  the  efforts  of  a  dumb  man  to 
speak.  The  young  bird,  though  nearly  of  equal  size,  and  now  almost  ready  to  fly  to  other 
regions,  had  not  the  slightest  resemblance  to  the  old  one  in  any  part  of  its  form  or  plumage, 
but  had  all  the  mother's  fierceness,  and  attacked  us  at  the  moment  of  its  first  introduction 
to  the  light.  It  had  a  small,  straight  pointed  bill,  and  was  covered  all  over  with  a  black 
down. 

The  Puffins  first  arrive  here  early  in  April,  hatch  their  young  in  the  beginning  of 
July,  and  disappear,  with  singular  exactness,  on  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  of  August.  In 
places  where  they  associate  in  great  multitudes,  they  fly  away  with  the  same  punctuality, 
the  whole  swarm  vanishing  on  a  certain  day,  to  a  single  bird.  On  this  grand  day  the 
attachment  of  the  females  to  their  young,  before  so  vehement,  expires  at  once,  and  gives 
way  to  a  new  instinct,  and  all  the  young  of  the  later  hatches  that  are  unable  to  fly, 
are  pitilessly  left  to  perish  with  hunger,  or  be  devoured  by  birds  of  prey.  As  my  friend 
wished  to  make  a  correct  drawing  of  the  two  birds,  we  took  them  away  with  us,  but, 
really,  not  without  some  compunction. 

We  had  intended  to  have  a  general  feast  on  the  Skerries,  and  had  stored  our  boat 
accordingly,  but,  while  the  cook  was  going  on  most  prosperously  with  his  preparations, 
our  cautious  captain  suddenly  reported  that  the  wind  was  likely  to  freshen  with  the  turn 
of  the  tide,  and  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  get  clear  of  the  race  as  speedily  as  possible. 
We  did  not  resist  his  suggestion,  but,  having  taken  care  that  the  islanders  should  be  as 
merry  without  us  as  we  could  make  them,  immediately  bustled  into  our  boat.  The  ground 
continues  rocky  and  rugged  for  more  than  two  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  island,  and, 
for  this  extent,  we  had  a  somewhat  unpleasant  passage  through  a  short,  curling  sea,  which 
occasionally  broke  into  the  boat.  The  strength  of  the  tide,  however,  sopn  hurried  us 
through  this  hubbub,  and  beyond  it  we  had  smooth  water.  We  were  much  surprised  to 
see  that  the  elder  Puffin,  which  had  but  an  hour  ago  so  forcibly  exemplified  the  ardour  of 
her  maternal  fondness,  now,  as  she  paddled  about  at  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  fiercely  beat 
off  the  young  bird  whenever  she  came  near  it.  She,  perhaps,  had  not  lost  her  attach- 
ment, but  her  discrimination,  and  may  not  have  known  her  offspring  when  out  of  its  hole. 
When  my  friend  had  completed  his  drawing,  we  put  both  the  birds  into  the  water,  when 
the  old  one  immediately  dived,  and  re-appeared  at  the  distance  of  a  hundred  yards  from 
us :  we  kept  her  in  sight,  for  a  short  time,  as  she  was  hastening  away  towards  the  Skerries, 

the  feathers  are  curiously  separated,  forming  a  narrow  line,  which  reaches  to  the  hinder  part  of  the  head :  the  crown  of 
the  head,  hinder  part  of  the  neck,  and  upper  part  of  the  plumage,  arc  black,  and  a  collar  of  the  same  colour  encircles 
the  neck :  the  under  parts  are  white :  the  tail  consists  of  sixteen  feathers :  the  legs  are  reddish  orange." — History  of 
British  Birds. 

where 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  9 

where  she  would  no  doubt  arrive,  and,  probably,  return  to  her  hole  with  the  expectation 
of  finding  her  young  one.  The  latter,  thus  deserted,  was  quite  helpless:  it  had  not  yet 
attained  sufficient  strength  to  make  its  way  through  the  sea,  but  continued  with  its  head 
under  water,  ineffectually  struggling  to  dive.  I  fear  that,  in  the  opinion  of  my  female 
readers,  we  shall  lose  favour  by  this  story,  but  I  beg  to  assure  them,  that  we  made  all  the 
atonement  that  was  now  in  our  power,  by  recovering  the  little  orphan,  and  committing  it 
to  the  care  of  a  tender-hearted  fisherman,  who  promised  to  make  it  a  fire-side  pet. 

We  lengthened  our  excursion  by  sailing  a  mile  up  the  strait  which  divides  Holy- 
head  island  from  the  main  coast  of  Anglesey,  and  here  we  came  to  an  anchor,  and  without 
fear  of  interruption  from  rocks  or  surfs,  spread  out  the  contents  of  our  basket.  The  strait 
at  this  end  is  more  than  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  and  would  be  a  good  roadstead  were  it 
not  so  blocked  up  with  sand.  It  was  now  about  half  ebb,  and  the  water  was  not  more 
than  a  hundred  yards  across,  and  might  have  been  forded  by  a  grenadier.  Some  fisher- 
men were  hauling  their  nets  close  to  us,  but  with  no  success,  and  we  learned  from  them 
that  fish  is  at  all  times  verv  scarce  on  this  coast.  It  was  late  in  the  evening  when  we 
landed  at  Holyhead,  where  the  fresh  arrival  of  a  packet  full  of  new  faces,  and  the  conse- 
quent bustle  and  noise,  kept  us  quite  alive  till  bed-time. 

On  the  following  day  we  again  set  sail  with  a  fair  and  fresh  breeze,  intending  to  pro- 
ceed round  to  Amlwch,  but,  unfortunately,  or,  to  speak  with  more  candour,  imprudently, 
we  started  when  the  flood  tide  was  nearly  exhausted,  and  when  we  were  within  about 
three  miles  of  Carnell's  Point,  the  ebb  came  down,  and,  in  a  very  short  time,  the  sea  was 
all  in  confusion.  The  wind  increased  rapidly,  and,  with  a  sudden  puff,  carried  away  our 
mizen-mast:  we  then  thought  it  quite  time  to  lower  our  foresail  and  row  for  the  land, 
which  we  reached  with  difficulty,  and  not  without  some  hazard  of  being  dashed  against 
the  sharp,  outlying  rocks  which  line  the  shore.  Before  we  landed  there  was  a  terrible  sea 
off  the  Point,  which  must  inevitably  have  proved  fatal  to  us,  had  we  attempted  to  go 
round.  Carnell's  Point  is  the  north-western  extremity  of  Anglesey,  from  whence  the  coast 
runs  to  the  eastward,  so  that,  if  we  could  have  doubled  the  cape,  we  should  have  had  the 
wind  off  the  land  in  our  further  progress,  and  the  water  along  shore  perfectly  smooth. 
But  to  know  this  was  a  matter  of  no  great  consolation  to  us  in  our  present  circumstances. 
We  here  felt,  very  particularly,  the  encumbrance  of  portmanteaus;  articles,  indeed,  Avhich, 
in  a  course  like  ours,  it  required  an  unceasing  series  of  stratagems  to  keep  company  with. 
They  now  detained  us  for  two  hours  on  the  beach,  when  our  boatmen,  who  had  been 
scouring  the  country  round,  came  to  our  relief  with  two  horses,  and  we  again  set  forward 
nothing  the  worse  for  our  misadventure,  and  with  something  to  talk  about. 

We  proceeded  along  a  by-road,  rough  and  stony,  with  a  dreary,  woodless  country  all 
around  us,  till  we  arrived  at  the  village  of  Cemaes,  rich  in  public-houses.  We  stopped  at 
that  which  had  the  most  promising  outside,  but  it  afforded  us  nothing  but  barley  bread, 
the  common  food  of  the  greater  part  of  the  population  of  Anglesey.  We  rarely  observed 

VOL.  TI  c  a  field 


10  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

a  field-of  wheat  in  the  island,  though,  as  I  have  before  mentioned,  where  wheat  is  grown,  its 
quality  is  excellent.  The  village  is  situated  at  the  head  of  a  narrow,  sheltered  creek,  which 
opens  into  a  sandy  bay,  bounded  on  each  side  by  a  low  promontory  of  lime-stone.  The 
creek  is  frequented  by  a  few  small  sloops  which  bring  coal  and  culm  from  Glamorganshire, 
and  carry  out  corn  to  Liverpool.  The  marble  from  the  quarries  of  Messrs.  G.  Bullock 
and  Co.  is  shipped  at  this  place  for  London.  We  saw  a  large  block  of  it  here  of  uncom- 
mon beauty,  though  it  appeared  without  the  aid  of  any  brighter  polish  than  what  it 
had  received  from  the  friction  of  the  saAv.  The  marble  is  of  the  kind  called  Serpentine, 
and  many  specimens  of  it  bear  a  near  resemblance  to  verd-antique.  The  quarries  are  in 
the  parish  of  Llanfechell,  about  three  miles  from  Cemaes.  The  stone  is  found  in  large 
detached  pieces,  protruding  in  some  places  through  the  surface  of  the  soil,  and  confusedly 
tumbled  together,  as  if  the  whole  mass  had  been  shattered  and  overturned  by  some  violent 
concussion.  In  the  quarries  that  have  been  worked  to  the  greatest  depth,  no  greater  re- 
gularity of  arrangement  has  been  observed.  Six  have  already  been  opened,  in  each  of 
which  the  stone  is  distinguished  by  some  striking  variations.  In  one  it  is  of  a  simple,  un- 
mixed colour,  exactly  resembling  porphyry,  and  in  another,  at  the  distance  of  not  more 
than  fifty  yards,  it  is  variegated  with  a  rich  and  splendid  confusion  of  colours;  dark  green, 
with  spots  and  streaks  of  lighter  green,  white,  purple,  red,  and  many  mixed  tints.  Some 
varieties  contain  crystalline  lime-stone  in  small  patches,  and  occasional  spots  and  veins  of 
quartz  and  asbestos.  Considerable  quantities  of  asbestos  are  found  in  the  quarries  lying 
between  the  masses  of  stone.  The  marble  is  capable  of  receiving  a  very  good  polish,  and, 
according  to  my  judgment  and  taste  in  such  matters,  is  in  no  degree  inferior  in  beauty  to 
the  most  costly  foreign  marbles.  There  is  no  fear  of  exhausting  the  supply,  for  the  stone 
appears  at  intervals  above  the  surface  of  the  soil,  over  an  extent  of  seventy  acres  of  ground. 
Near  it  is  found  the  common,  coarse  slate-rock  of  the  country,  with  occasional  veins  of 
copper  ore.  On  the  coast  the  slate-rock  is  interrupted  at  Cemaes  Bay  by  lime-stone,  which 
is  continued  to  the  eastward,  describing  an  indented  line  of  coast  of  inconsiderable  height, 
and  rather  more  than  three  miles  long,  when  the  green  slate  again  makes  its  appearance. 

Our  journey  from  Cemaes  to  Amlwch,  a  distance  of  about  eight  miles,  was  very 
dull  and  uninteresting.  The  country  still  preserved  the  same  dismal  and  unvaried  cha- 
racter, and  manifested  the  same  signs  of  unskilful  and  imperfect  cultivation  that  we  had 
noticed  when  passing  through  the  more  central  parts  of  the  island.  The  farmers  here 
adhere  to  the  pernicious  system  of  forcing  the  land  by  successive  crops  till  it  is  utterly 
impoverished,  when  it  is  suffered  to  lie  waste,  or  is  laid  out  in  penurious  pasture.  They 
are  induced  to  adopt  this  plan  by  the  most  hopeless  and  unassailable  kind  of  ignorance ; 
not  that  which  is  out  of  the  way  of  improvement,  but  that  which  will  not  be  convinced 
that  improvement  is  possible.  They  have  here  and  there  an  example  of  a  better  course 
of  agriculture  within  reach  of  their  observation,  and  its  plausibility  is  illustrated  before 
their  eyes  by  finer  crops  and  fuller  granaries  than  their  own ;  but  all  this  is  insufficient  to 

break 


Black  Marble  Quarry,  near  red  wharf  bay,  Anglesea 


The  entrance  to  Amlwch  harbour  Anglesea 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  11 

break  through  that  tough  link  of  prejudice  which  connects  their  practice  with  that  of  their 
ancestors,  and  which  they  imagine  has  a  title  to  all  their  respect,  if  it  be  only  that  it  is  as 
old  as  Cadwalader.  It  is  really  quite  lamentable  to  travel  through  this  island,  and  see  large 
tracts  of  land  which  present  no  one  natural  obstacle  to  cultivation,  yielded  up  to  barren- 
ness as  if  they  were  mere  bogs  and  swamps.  That  the  farmers  are  poor  under  such  a 
system  of  mismanagement  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  state,  and  they  are  not  among  those 
whom  the  legislature  can  make  rich,  unless,  indeed,  people  could  be  made  wise  by  statute. 
Those  substantial  and  respectable  farm-houses  which  enliven  the  face  of  the  country 
throughout  England  have  no  fellows  here,  and  are  very  rare  in  every  part  of  Wales  that  I 
have  visited.  In  England  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  farmers  have,  within  the  last 
twenty  years,  raised  their  rank  in  society,  and  stand  in  a  nearer  relation  to  the  country- 
gentlemen  than  they  did ;  but  it  is  not  so,  speaking  generally,  with  the  farmer  in  Wales, 
who  still  keeps  in  his  old  place,  content  to  know  that  he  is  quite  as  far  advanced  as  his 
father  before  him. 

As  we  approached  Amlwch  the  country  became  still  more  barren  and  dreary  :  here 
all  vegetation  is  blighted  and  tarnished  by  the  poisonous  fumes  from  the  copper-works,  and 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  town,  and  on  the  ridges  of  the  Parys  Mountain, 
the  land  is  utterly  bare,  and  reduced  to  a  frightful  desert.  On  our  first  entrance  into  the 
town,  it  struck  us  at  once  as  the  most  miserable  place  that  we  had  ever  beheld,  and  a 
deeper  enquiry  into  its  circumstances  served  only  to  confirm  our  first  impression.  About 
fifty  years  ago  Amlwch  was  a  village  of  six  cottages,  when  it  was  suddenly  raised  to  im- 
portance by  the  discovery  of  the  great  treasure  in  the  Parys  Mountain,  and,  in  a  few 
years,  became,  in  extent  and  population,  the  most  considerable  town  in  Anglesey.  Ac- 
cording to  a  return  made  to  government  in  1801,  the  number  of  houses  amounted  to 
1025,  and  of  inhabitants,  to  4977.  But  the  foundation  on  which  this  rapid  creation 
has  been  raised  is  no  longer  able  to  support  the  weight,  and  its  decay  seems  likely 
to  be  almost  as  sudden  as  its  increase.  The  mines,  its  sole  prop,  have  for  the  last 
six  or  seven  years  been  regularly  and  rapidly  declining,  and,  at  this  time,  do  not  yield 
more  than  one  third  of  their  former  produce.  This  unfortunate  failure  has  already  pro- 
duced a  sad  change  in  the  aspect  of  the  town  and  the  condition  of  the  people.  Many 
families  have  fled,  and  their  cottages  are  now  falling  to  ruin;  but  there  is  still  a  much 
more  numerous  population  than  can  be  tolerably  supported  by  the  mines,  and  numbers 
are  consequently  left  in  a  miserable  state  of  destitution,  unfitted  for  all  other  employment, 
or  ignorant  where  to  seek  it.  Nothing  met  our  observation  that  bore  the  marks  of  cheer- 
fulness and  comfort :  the  streets  were  swarming  with  half-naked  children,  the  men  and 
women  were  equally  ragged  and  filthy,  and  their  habitations  looked  black  and  ruinous. 
Toil  never  appears  under  a  more  repulsive  and  disgusting  form  than  in  mines  and  smelt- 
ing-houses,  and  Amlwch,  probably,  at  the  period  of  its  highest  prosperity,  would  not  have 
impressed  upon  a  traveller  any  very  flattering  idea  of  the  happy  condition  of  the  people, 

c  2  but 


12  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

but  it  now  presents  the  most  melancholy  view  of  human  society  that  I  have  ever  wit- 
nessed. A  more  extended  migration  is  the  only  resource  from  which  the  people  can 
expect  any  certain  and  permanent  relief,  for  so  long  a  time  has  elapsed  since  the  first  de- 
fection of  the  mines,  that  there  is  but  little  reason  to  hope  for  another  lucky  discovery,  and, 
indeed,  if  a  new  vein  were  to  be  brought  to  light  as  rich  as  the  last,  it  would  afford  them 
but  a  temporary  benefit*  and  leave  them  again  destitute  as  they  are  now,  and  shut  out 
from  all  other  modes  of  industry.  Immense  fortunes  have  been  acquired  by  the  pro- 
prietors of  the  mines,  and  many  of  the  agents  and  stewards  appointed  to  superintend  them 
have  retired  from  their  posts  independent,  but  the  common  labourers  always  received  con- 
siderably lower  wages  than  are  usually  given  to  miners.  I  do  not  mention  this  as  a  cause 
of  regret  or  complaint,  for,  whatever  had  been  the  amount  of  their  wages,  they  would  not, 
I  apprehend,  have  laid  by  their  superfluous  wealth  in  contemplation  of  an  unfavourable 
change  in  their  situation,  but  have  spent  it,  as  miners  are  wont,  in  every  kind  of  vitious 
indulgence  within  their  reach.  To  give  to  labourers  more  than  they  want,  is  to  do  them  a 
great  injury,  but  the  people  of  Amlwch  have  never  suffered  from  this  mistaken  kind  of 
charity:  they  have  never  received  more  than  a  bare  subsistence  in  remuneration  for  their 
hard  services  in  an  unwholesome  and  perilous  employment,  and  they  have  now,  I  think,  in 
these  days  of  their  distress,  some  claim  upon  those  whom  they  have  toiled  to  enrich.  I 
would  by  no  means  recommend  that  those  whose  hands  are  not  required  should  be  main- 
tained in  idleness,  but,  surely,  some  assistance  should  be  given  them,  to  enable  them  to 
remove  to  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  keep  them  from  starving,  till  they  could  find 
some  other  means  of  working  for  their  bread. 

This  wretched  town  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  hideous  scene  of  desolation  ;  the  country 
round  looks  as  if  it  had  been  blasted  by  a  horrid  pestilence,  and  raises  in  the  mind  no 
images  but  of  misery  and  famine.  From  the  harbour,  which  lies  more  than  half  a  mile 
below  the  town,  we  had  a  complete  view  of  the  place  with  all  its  dismal  accompaniments. 
On  the  western  side  of  the  harbour,  and  for  an  extent  of  several  acres,  there  was  nothing  to 
be  seen  but  a  waste  of  rocks,  sharp'  and  jagged,  and  unrelieved  by  a  vestige  of  earth  or 
vegetation ;  beyond  this  were  smeltirig-houses  vomiting  forth  flames  and  clouds  of  black 
smoke ;  further  on  appeared  the  straggling  huts  of  the  town,  and  the  prospect  was  closed 
by  the  naked  front  of  the  Parys  Mountain.  This  total  destruction  of  all  vegetation  on  the 
land  bordering  the  sea  has  been  occasioned  by  the  smoke  from  the  furnaces,  and  the  fumes 
from  some  immense  kilns,  in  which  copper  ore  was  formerly  roasted.  The  latter  are  now 
reduced  to  a  heap  of  rubbish,  and  the  blackened  bricks  and  stones  look  like  the  ruins  of 
a  tremendous  fire,  and  add  not  a  little  to  the  horrors  of  the  place.  Here  and  there  stood 
a  group  of  men  and  boys  just  liberated  from  the  smelting-houses,  and  their  black  and 
ragged  figures  and  ghastly  countenances  were  quite  in  unison  with  the  wild  and  melan- 
choly aspect  of  nature  around  them.  Of  the  general  good  that  has  been  produced  by  the 
discovery  of  these  mines  I  am  not  prepared  to  speak,  but  they  have  proved  a  sad  curse  to 

this 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  13 

this  neighbourhood,  and,  after  having  been  worked  almost  to  exhaustion,  and  yielding  an 
enormous  amount  of  wealth,  they  leave  the  people  in  want,  and  the  country  a  wilderness. 

The  harbour  of  Amlwch  is  a  very  narrow  inlet  between  the  rocks,  but  extending  so 
far  inland  that  there  is  sufficient  room  for  all  the  vessels  which  frequent  the  port.  It  was 
chiefly  cut  out  by  art,  and  was  a  work  of  great  labour  and  expense.  It  is  not  commodious, 
nor,  at  all  times,  very  safe,  the  entrance  lying  completely  open  to  the  north  or  sea  wind, 
and  being  so  confined  that,  with  the  wind  off  the  land,  it  is  difficult  of  access.  The  pro- 
prietors of  the  mines  formerly  employed  fifteen  brigs,  from  one  hundred  to  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  tons  burthen,  besides  many  vessels  of  a  smaller  class,  but  the  number,  of 
course,  has  diminished  in  proportion  to  the  decline  of  the  mines.  The  articles  produced 
from  the  mines  and  exported  are  copper,  copper-ore,  refined  sulphur,  and  ochre.  The 
greater  part  of  the  ore,  after  having  been  separated  from  the  sulphur,  with  which  it 
abounds,  is  carried  to  the  company's  smelting-houses  at  Swansea;  but  the  poorest  kind, 
containing  from  one  and  a  quarter  to  two  per  cent,  of  metal,  is  melted  on  the  spot.  There 
are  two  smelting-houses  here,  furnished  with  thirty-one  reverberatory  furnaces,  which  are 
charged  every  five  hours  with  twelve  cwt.  of  ore;  this  quantity  yields  half  a  cwt.  of  rough 
copper,  containing  fifty  per  cent,  of  pure  metal.  Coals  for  the  use  of  the  furnaces  are 
procured  from  Swansey  and  Liverpool. 

The  various  mineral  operations  have  entirely  changed  the  face  of  nature  on  the  land, 
and  we  found  that  the  sea  had  not  escaped  the  wide  contamination,  but  was  changed  to 
a  yellow  sea.  The  discoloration  is  occasioned  by  ochre,  which  is  washed  down  from  the 
high  grounds  near  the  Parys  Mountain,  and  falls  into  the  harbour.  This  yellow,  turbid 
water,  spread  several  hundred  yards  from  the  harbour's  mouth,  and  was  curiously  con- 
trasted with  the  green,  transparent  sea  beyond  it.  The  coast,  east  and  west  of  Amlwch, 
is  extended  in  a  long  range  of  low  cliffs  composed  of  green,  laminated  slate  rock,  with  a 
rugged  and  broken  front,  worn  into  numberless  caverns  and  recesses  by  the  dashing  of  the 
sea.  To  the  westward  of  the  harbour  there  is  a  small  bay,  which  is  a  good  roadstead  for 
small  vessels,  well  sheltered  from  the  southern  and  western  winds. 

There  is  a  decent  inn  at  Amlwch,  to  which  we  retired  after  a  day  of  much  more 
fatigue  than  amusement.  On  the  following  morning  we  visited  the  Parys  Mountain,  the 
leading  object  of  curiosity  to  travellers  in  Anglesey.  It  lies  about  two  miles  to  the  south- 
ward of  the  town,  the  road  leading  to  it  with  an  almost  continual  but  gentle  ascent.  The 
mountain  itself  does  not  deserve  the  name,  being  not  more  than  five  hundred  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  and  a  hill  of  very  inconsiderable  height,  if  we  calculate  from  the  point 
where  the  rise  begins  to  make  an  angle  with  the  sloping  plain  sufficiently  marked  to  catch 
the  eye.  Its  external  aspect  is  savage  and  drear}r  in  the  extreme;  it  is  not  very  rugged, 
but  disfigured  by  heaps  of  rubbish  from  the  mines,  and  on  every  part  of  its  surface  as  bare 
as  the  public  road.  No  kind  of  vegetation  can  live  in  this  sulphureous  atmosphere ;  not 

a 


14  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

a  weed,  not  a  lichen  on  the  rocks  has  been  spared.  On  reaching  the  summit  our  at- 
tention was  first  attracted  by  a  little  cluster  of  women,  who,  with  handkerchiefs  bound 
round  their  mouths,  and  armed  with  iron  gloves,  were  hammering  the  ore  into  small 
pieces  for  the  kilns.  Here  they  sit  for  eight  or  ten  hours  in  a  day,  often  exposed 
to  wet  and  cold,  and,  in  spite  of  all  their  precautions,  suffering  in  their  health  from 
the  particles  of  metallic  dust  which  they  inhale,  but  still,  according  to  the  common 
scale  by  which  the  industry  of  women  is  appreciated,  they  earn  barely  sufficient  to  keep 
them  alive. 

We  were  amazingly  struck  with  the  first  view  of  the  mine,  which  is  truly  an  astonish- 
ing monument  of  human  industry.  It  is  quite  distinct  from  all  other  mines  that  I  have 
ever  seen  in  the  vastness  of  the  excavation  which  has  been  laid  open  to  the  day ;  the 
great  body  of  the  mountain  being  ore,  the  mine  has  been  worked  like  a  stone-quarry,  and 
an  immense  crater  has  been  formed  nearly  a  mile  in  circumference,  and,  in  many  parts, 
three  hundred  feet  in  depth.  As  we  stood  upon  the  verge  of  this  tremendous  chasm,  it 
appeared  to  us  like  a  mighty  work  of  nature,  produced  by  some  great  convulsion,  but, 
certainly,  suggested  to  our  minds  nothing  so  mean  as  the  pick-axe  and  the  spade.  There 
were  but  few  people  at  work,  and  their  figures,  discovered  here  and  there  among  the  huge 
rocks,  looked  merely  as  flies  upon  a  Avail,  and  one  could  scarcely  imagine  that,  by  these 
little  creatures,  each  picking  its  little  hole,  the  mountain  had  been  thus  demolished.  The 
sides  of  the  mine  are  mostly  perpendicular,  but  the  bottom  is  broken  and  irregular,  and 
penetrated  in  various  parts  by  wide  and  deep  hollows,  in  which  veins  of  peculiar  richness 
have  been  followed.  There  are  numerous  caverns  also  at  various  elevations  in  the  sides, 
some  of  which  are  exceedingly  grand.  One  of  them  is  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  length, 
ninety  feet  in  width,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet  in  height,  the  craggy  roof  being  sup- 
ported only  by  a  single  pillar.  In  another  part  of  the  mine  there  is  an  excavation,  a  hun- 
dred and  twenty  feet  in  length,  forty-five  feet  in  width,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet 
high,  in  one  entire  arch. 

There  are  two  mines  in  the  mountain,  the  Mona  Mine,  and  the  Parys  Mine;  the 
former  of  which  was  till  lately  the  sole  property  of  Lord  Uxbridge,  who  had  likewise  a 
share  in  the  other  together  with  Mr.  Hughes.  The  earl's  interest  in  them  both  is  at  pre- 
sent made  over  to  a  company  from  Cornwall.  The  circumstances  which  led  to  the  dis- 
covery of  this  immense  store  of  wealth  are  singular.  In  the  year  1764,  Messrs.  Foe  and 
Co.,  of  Macclesfield,  applied  to  Sir  Nicholas  Bayley  for  a  lease  of  some  lead  mines  in  the 
peninsula  of  Llyn,  in  Caernarvonshire,  with  which  they  were  obliged  to  take  a  p<*rt  of  the 
Parys  Mountain,  an  encumbrance  to  which  they  submitted  with  extreme  reluctance. 
They  agreed,  however,  to  make  a  fair  trial  upon  it,  and,  on  sinking  a  shaft,  at  once  dis- 
covered that  there  was  ore,  but  not  in  quantities  that  raised  any  flattering  expectations. 
They  continued  working  for  a  long  time,  their  expenses  overbalancing  their  profits,  till,  at 

last, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  15 

last,  in  despair,  they  determined  to  strike,  and  sent  orders  to  their  agent  to  desist  from  all 
further  operations.  This  was  truly  a  critical  moment  of  the  venture,  and  the  agent  who 
still  contrived  to  keep  it  alive,  and  bring  it  to  a  successful  issue,  ought  assuredly  to  live  for 
ever  in  a  statue  of  copper.  From  the  appearance  Of  a  spring  of  water  that  issued  from  a 
certain  part  of  the  mountain,  he  was  convinced  that  there  was  a  body  of  mineral  at  no 
great  distance  from  the  spot,  and,  before  the  fate  of  his  long  and  arduous  search  was  irre- 
vocably signed  and  sealed,  he  resolved  to  employ  all  bis  resources  in  one  struggle  more. 
With  this  view  he  divided  his  forces  into  ten  detachments,  and  appointed  their  several 
stations,  in  which  each  was  to  sink  a  shaft  :  to  work  they  went,  and,  in  two  days,  at  the 
depth  of  seven  feet  from  the  surface,  came  to  that  rich  mass  of  ore  which  is  still  not  ex- 
hausted. Shortly  after  this  discover}',  Mr.  Hughes  commenced  a  trial  upon  his  division 
of  the  mountain,  which  was  attended  with  equal  success,  and  both  mines  have  since  proved 
equally  productive. 

The  ore  of  the  mines  is  chiefly  the  yellow  copper  ore,  containing  large  quantities  of 
sulphur,  and  from  four  to  fifteen  per  cent,  of  metal.  There  are  occasional  veins  of  black 
ore  which  is  of  a  much  richer  quality,  yielding  from  fifteen  to  twenty  per  cent,  of  copper. 
Native  copper  is  sometimes  found  adhering  in  thin  leaves  to  the  rock,  but  the  quantity  is 
trifling. 

The  ore  is  separated  from  the  mine  in  large  lumps  by  picking,  and  frequently  by 
blasting.  It  is  then  broken  into  small  pieces,  and  disengaged  as  much  as  possible  from 
waste  matter,  after  which  it  is  placed  in  a  kiln  and  burnt.  The  walls  of  the  kilns  are 
about  six  feet  high,  and  of  great  length,  the  largest  of  them  being  capable  of  receiving 
thirteen  hundred  tons  of  ore.  The  ore  is  piled  up  three  or  four  feet  above  the  top  of  the 
walls,  and  is  coated  over  with  a  thick  integument  of  clay,  which  prevents  the  escape  of 
the  smoke.  A  little  fire  is  kindled  in  different  places,  and  the  whole  mass  becomes  gra- 
dually heated,  and  continues  to  burn  per  se.  The  sulphur  sublimes  to  the  top  of  the  kiln, 
and  is  conveyed  by  flues  into  a  long  chamber,  where  it  becomes  condensed  and  falls  to  the 
ground,  but  is  not  fit  for  use  till  it  is  boiled  and  depurated.  The  ore  burns  with  a  very 
slow  heat,  requiring  six  months,  and,  in  the  largest  kilns,  ten  months,  for  its  complete 
purgation.  When  sufficiently  roasted,  it  is  washed  and  dressed,  and  is  then  ready  for 
exportation. 

The  water  in  which  the  ore  is  washed  becomes  highly  impregnated  with  copper, 
which  is  held  in  solution  by  the  sulphuric  acid,  but  recovered  again  in  a  substantive  form 
by  a  process  which  is  really  somewhat  startling  to  a  mere  novice  in  such  matters.  There 
is  a  large  reservoir  of  water  lodged  in  the  bottom  of  the  mine  which  is  still  more  strongly 
charged  with  the  mineral,  and  this  is  pumped  up  and  placed,  together  with  the  water  in 
which  the  ore  has  been  washed,  in  cisterns  like  tan-pits.  In  these  is  then  immersed  a 
certain  quantity  of  iron,  with  which  the  sulphuric  acid  immediately  combines,  and  lets 
fall  the  copper.  In  order  to  expedite  the  process,  the  iron  is  repeatedly  scraped,  giving 

the 


16  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  acid  a  clear  surface  to  act  upon,  but,  by  this  operation,  a  portion  of  the  decomposed 
iron  is  mixed  with  the  precipitate,  and  materially  impairs  its  qualities.  The  sediment  is 
removed  in  the  form  of  mud,  which  contains  from  ten  to  twenty-five  per  cent,  of  copper; 
but,  if  the  iron  is  left  undisturbed  till  it  be  gradually  and  completely  dissolved,  it  will 
precipitate  nearly  its  weight  of  pure  metal.  Old  pots  and  pans,  or  any  kind  of  damaged 
iron  that  can  be  procured,  are  used  in  the  pits,  of  which  there  are  several  ranges,  each 
range  communicating  with  a  large,  shallow  pool :  when  the  copper  is  completely  extri- 
cated, the  water  is  let  off  into  the  pools,  and  the  iron  in  solution  settles  in  a  yellow  ochre. 
This,  after  having  been  properly  dried,  is  exported  to  London  and  Liverpool. 

Of  the  whole  quantity  of  ore  annually  procured  from  the  mines  at  the  period  when 
they  were  worked  to  the  greatest  advantage,  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  no  certain  ac- 
count. Mr.  Aikin  has  stated  *  that  the  Parys  Mine  furnished  from  five  thousand  to  ten 
thousand  tons  per  quarter,  exclusive  of  what  was  procured  from  the  sulphate  of  copper  in 
solution,  and,  as  nearly  the  same  number  of  men  were  employed  in  both  mines,  it  is  pro- 
bable that  they  contained  an  equal  quantity  of  ore.  Their  present  produce,  as  we  were 
informed  by  one  of  the  stewards,  does  not  amount  to  more  than  a  third  of  what  they 
yielded  twenty  years  ago,  but  there  are  still  some  expectations  of  new  discoveries,  founded 
on  the  judgment  and  vigour  of  the  Cornwall  company,  who  have  motives  to  exertion 
which  the  old  proprietors  can  well  afford  to  despise. 

After  a  most  entertaining  morning,  spent  in  exploring  the  various  recesses  of  this 
extraordinary  place,  we  returned  to  Amlwch,  from  which  we  were  glad  to  make  our 
escape  as  speedily  as  possible.  About  two  miles  east  of  the  town  we  came  to  the  church 
of  Llan-Elian,  rendered  very  conspicuous  among  the  churches  of  Anglesey  by  a  steeple, 
and  the  general  neatness  of  its  structure.  As  we  were  travelling  about  the  island,  it  had 
occurred  to  us,  considering  the  imperfect  state  of  its  cultivation,  that  it  was  most  unac- 
countably stocked  with  barns  ;  but  we  were  reconciled  to  these  contradictory  appearances 
at  Cemaes,  by  ascertaining,  that  many  among  the  buildings  that  we  had  supposed  to  be 
barns  were  churches.  The  explanation,  however,  served  only  to  convince  us  that  they 
were  not  all  barns,  and  we  were  still  at  a  loss,  looking  only  at  the  exterior  of  each,  to  de- 
termine which  were,  and  which  were  not.  The  church  of  Llan-Elian  is  a  Gothic  building 
in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  is  apparently  of  considerable  antiquity.  It  is  dedicated  to 
Saint  Elian,  surnamed  Gannaid,  the  Bright,  and  stands  on  the  brow  of  a  hill,  at  a  short 
distance  from  the  promontory  which  I  have  before  mentioned  as  being  honored  with  the 
name  of  the  same  saint.  He  lived  in  the  fifth  century,  and  was  a  man  of  great  authority, 
preserving,  for  some  centuries  after  his  death,  a  high  reputation  for  the  extent  and  potency 
of  his  influence  over  the  affairs  of  men.  In  the  church  there  is  a  massy  chest  strongly 
guarded  with  iron  and  locks,  in  which  the  offerings  are  deposited,  and  in  the  east  wall  of 

•  Journal  of  a  Tour  through  North  Wales,  p.  141. 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BKITAIN.  17 

the  choir  is  a  small  closet,  called  Cwpwrdd  Elian,  the  grand  place  of  trial,  in  which  the 
decrees  of  fate  and  the  saint  are  made  known.  His  anniversary  has  been  celebrated  here 
from  time  immemorial  by  wakes  held  in  the  month  of  August,  and,  on  these  occasions, 
crowds  of  people  of  both  sexes,  and  of  all  ages  and  sizes,  formerly  flocked  to  the  church, 
all  trembling  with  hopes  and  fears  about  dying  and  marrying,  and  purchasing  lands  or 
houses,  and  about  the  produce  of  the  harvest,  and  the  health  of  their  cattle,  and  a  thou- 
sand other  things,  for  there  were  few  concerns  of  life  that  were  not  supposed  to  come 
within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  saint.  The  first  act  of  the  devotee  was  a  visit  to  the  chest, 
for  a  little  bribery  is  conceived  to  be  as  efficacious  with  saints  as  with  sinners,  and  then 
came  the  perilous  ordeal  of  the  Cwpwrdd.  If  a  man  could  not  get  in,  it  was  all  over  with 
him  at  once,  but,  supposing  him  to  have  gained  admission,  he  was  to  receive  a  violent 
squeeze  if  ill  luck  were  to  be  his  portion,  but  if  his  wishes  were  to  meet  with  favour,  he 
stood  at  his  ease.  The  closet  is  about  four  feet  in  height,  as  many  in  breadth,  and  a  foot 
and  a  half  in  depth,  and  it  may  be  imagined,  on  a  view  of  these  dimensions,  that  the 
portentous  warning  was  very  much  a  question  of  fat,  but  it  was  by  no  means  so  consi- 
dered by  the  faithful,  who  were  much  more  apprehensive  of  being  excluded  by  the  weight 
of  their  sins,  than  the  size  of  their  shoulders.  Those,  however,  who  had  both  these  ob- 
stacles to  contend  against,  would  not  always  expose  themselves  to  the  risk  of  a  squeeze, 
but  rest  contented  with  making  an  extra-donation  to  the  chest,  which  was  charitably  open 
to  all,  and,  in  the  course  of  time,  became  so  wealthy,  that  three  tenements,  still  appended 
to  the  living,  were  purchased  with  its  contents.  The  faith  and  numbers  of  the  devotees 
have,  of  late  years,  greatly  diminished,  but  there  are  still  a  few  believers,  and  the  chest 
still  yields  annually  a  little  treasure,  which  is  distributed  among  the  poor  of  the  parish, 
sometimes  returning  to  the  pockets  from  whence  it  came.  The  ceremony  of  the  Cwpwrdd 
has  been  subject  to  some  little  alteration.  At  present,  if  a  man  can  creep  into  it,  and 
turn  himself  round,  he  is  to  be  healthy  and  prosperous  throughout  the  year,  but,  if  he 
cannot  conform  to  both  of  these  requisitions,  disaster,  sickness,  and  death,  are  to  be 
expected.  This  trial  is  never  attempted  with  any  disposition  to  fun  and  merriment, 
but  with  downright  seriousness  and  anxiety,  and,  if  a  man  proves  unsuccessful,  he  looks 
upon  himself  as  a  devoted  creature,  and  retires  well  prepared  to  pine  himself  down 
to  a  more  manageable  bulk  for  the  ensuing  wake.  I  received  my  information  on  this 
subject  from  a  gentleman  living  at  Holyhead,  who  assured  me  that  he  has  seen  a  fellow, 
almost  as  big  as  an  ox,  striving,  with  all  his  might,  to  cram  himself  into  the  closet,  and 
finally  give  up  the  struggle  with  a  countenance  of  as  much  anguish  as  if  sentence  of  im- 
mediate death  had  been  passed  upon  him.  The  diffusion  of  methodism  has  contributed 
to  wean  the  people  from  these  absurdities,  and  it  is  only  to  be  regretted,  that  it  has  in- 
troduced others  in  their  place  of  a  far  more  odious  character. 

A  due  degree  of  respect  has  been  manifested  for  the  high  character  of  Elian  in  the 
selection  of  the  promontory  intended  to  bear  and  perpetuate  his  name,  for,  excepting  the 

VOL.  ii.  D  great 


18  VOYAGt    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

great  promontory  of  Holyhead,  reserved  for  the  pre-eminent  Gybi,  it  is  the  loftiest  and 
most  remarkable  point  of  land  on  the  coast  of  Anglesey.  It  is  the  north-easternmost 
point  of  the  island,  and  is  a  mark  of  great  consequence  in  the  navigation  of  the  channel. 
There  is  a  small  light-house  upon  it,  maintained  by  the  trustees  of  the  Liverpool  docks, 
for  the  benefit  of  vessels  rounding  it  from  the  southward  and  eastward,  which,  without  a 
guide,  would  be  liable  to  danger  from  the  deep  bay  of  Dulas,  and  from  various  rocks  and 
shoals  which  obstruct  the  channel. 

Leaving  this  sanctified  ground,  we  continued  our  journey  along  a  road  at  a  short 
distance  from  the  sea,  without  subject  for  remark,  till  a  sudden  and  simultaneous  ex- 
clamation was  forced  from  us  both  as  we  entered  a  little  glen,  shaded  with  ash  and  lime 
trees,  all  in  a  very  flourishing  condition.  Since  we  quitted  the  borders  of  the  Menai,  we 
had  not  seen  a  tree  in  the  island  that  was  permitted  to  do  more  than  just  show  its  head 
and  starve,  and,  for  some  days,  we  had  been  accustomed  to  a  country  so  utterly  bald  and 
barren,  that  this  warm  and  sheltered  nook  appeared  in  our  eyes,  from  the  force  of  con- 
trast, and  the  charm  of  rarity,  with  a  singular  beauty  and  grace.  Dulas  is  the  name  of 
this  favoured  spot,  which  owes  its  exclusive  culture,  I  imagine,  to  its  propinquity  to 
a  gentleman's  seat,  a  decent  habitation,  called  Llys  Dulas,  or  Dulas  Palace,  a  term  of 
distinction  very  familiar  in  Wales,  and  which  is,  in  some  instances,  supremely  ridiculous. 

From  hence  we  turned  to  the  sea-shore,  and  crossed  the  sands  of  Dulas  Bay,  a  nar- 
row inlet,  which  runs  a  mile  and  a  half  into  the  country,  and  is  a  good  harbour  for  small 
vessels.  Near  its  north  point  is  a  small  island,  called  Ynis  Gadarn,  to  the  eastward  of 
which,  and  distant  about  two  miles  from  the  land,  is  Dulas  Island,  a  reef  of  rocks,  a  mile 
in  length,  and  appearing  in  clusters  of  black  spots  above  the  water.  South  of  this  inlet 
we  skirted  another  sandy  bay,  bounded  to  the  south  by  Moelfra  Point,  a  low  strip  of  land, 
jutting  out  nearly  a  mile  into  the  sea.  The  eastern  coast  of  Anglesey  has  suffered  equally 
with  its  western  and  northern  coasts,  from  the  depredations  of  the  sea.  Along  its  whole 
front  it  is  hollowed  into  a  succession  of  bays  and  creeks,  with  far-projecting  promontories, 
and  with  many  small  islands,  appearing  in  specks  and  patches  along  the  shore.  AVith  the 
exception  of  a  few  headlands,  it  is  very  low,  but  the  bays  are  all  filled  with  sand,  which 
rises  in  banks  and  bars,  and  checks  the  further  encroachments  of  the  sea.  At  Moelfra 
Point  the  green  slate  rock  is  again  interrupted  by  limestone,  which  continues  to  bound  the 
island  along  the  remainder  of  the  eastern  coast  to  the  entrance  of  Beaumaris  Bay.  This 
limestone  is  turned  to  great  account,  almost  every  bay  and  creek  on  the  coast  having  its 
little  fleet  of  sloops  employed  in  exporting  it.  Large  quantities  of  it  are  here  burnt  into 
lime,  which  is  used  as  manure  by  the  farmers  round  the  country. 

The  greater  part  of  our  journey  of  this  day  offered  little  that  is  worthy  of  comme- 
moration, and  we  were  not  permitted  to  go  far  out  of  our  way  in  search  of  more  interest- 
ing matter.  Previous  to  our  departure  from  Amlwch,  we  had  marked  out  from  our 
itinerary  a  few  objects  for  notice  of  no  great  promise,  though  of  some  account  in  this  dull 

island, 


VOYAGE     ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  19 

island,  but.  these  we  were  prevented  from  attending  to  by  the  impregnable  obstinacy  and 
stupidity  of  our  guide.  He  had  fixed  upon  a  certain  line  of  march  in  his  own  mind,  en- 
tirely independent  of  our  wishes,  and  he  was  not  to  be  diverted  from  his  course,  either  by 
threats  or  persuasion.  His  leading  marks  were  the  public-houses,  which  he  found  out  in 
succession  as  they  occurred,  with  undeviating  accuracy,  becoming  at  each  call  more  and 
more  insensible  to  our  anger  and  abuse.  We  remonstrated  with  him  very  vehemently  for 
some  time,  but,  at  length,  we  gave  up  the  contest  as  quite  hopeless,  and  submitted  to  him 
as  one  submits  to  the  Solar  System,  or  any  other  uncontrollable  ordination.  I  am  cau- 
tious of  drawing  general  conclusions  from  the  peculiarities  of  individuals,  but  I  find  it 
noted  down  in  my  common-place  book,  that  our  guides  in  Wales  were  mostly  of  the  cast 
of  this  impracticable  fellow,  not  often  so  obstinate,  but  quite  as  stupid  and  as  fond  of  ale, 
and,  altogether,  the  cause  of  more  difficulty  and  delay  to  us  in  the  prosecution  of  our 
travels,  than  any  other  obstacles  whatever,  unless,  indeed,  I  mention  our  horses.  I  am 
not  the  first  traveller  in  Wales  who  has  made  complaints  to  this  effect,  and  I  am,  there- 
fore, the  less  inclined  to  believe,  as  our  present  lumpish  leader  would  have  it,  that  the  fault 
was  all  on  our  side,  and  that  he  was  really  going  on  in  the  best  and  pleasantest  way  that 
could  be  devised  for  all  parties. 

Having  visited  a  small  village,  with  a  public-house, near  Moelfra  Point,  we  left  the  shore, 
and  followed  a  road  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  or  two  from  it,  till  we  suddenly  found  ourselves 
again  on  the  border  of  the  sea  at  Traeth  Coch,  or  Red- Wharf,  a  capacious  and  beautiful  bay, 
running  several  miles  into  the  land.  From  an  eminence  near  its  western  point,  we  had  a 
grand  panorama  view  of  this  deep  inlet,  with  the  country  round  it  describing  two-thirds  of  a 
vast  circle.  At  the  western  point  the  coast  was  rocky  and  abrupt,  but,  further  south,  it  as- 
sumed a  milder  character,  rising  in  gentle  eminences,  spread  with  grass,  and  sprinkled  with  a 
little,  a  very  little  wood.  The  picture  on  this  side  was  enlivened  by  some  sloops  and  fishing- 
boats,  lying  at  anchor  under  the  land,  and  by  a  small  village  scattered  about  at  the  water's 
edge.  In  front,  a  wider  extent  of  country  was  disclosed,  flat  and  woodless,  but  well  covered 
with  corn,  and  the  whole  of  the  opposite  or  eastern  side  was  bounded  by  a  very  lofty  coast, 
descending  boldly  to  the  sea,  and  backed  in  the  distance  by  the  mountains  of  Caernarvon- 
shire. At  low  water  the  whole  bed  of  the  bay  is  left  dry,  and  it  becomes  a  wide  desart  of 
sand.  Across  the  mouth  there  is  a  dangerous  bar,  which  was  now  marked  out  by  a  long  line 
of  foam.  Through  this  there  is  a  narrow  channel,  made  by  a  fresh-water  stream,  sufficiently 
deep  for  the  admission  of  small  sloops,  but  vessels  of  any  considerable  burden  are  com- 
pletely excluded.  The  bay  lies  exposed  to  the  north  wind,  but  vessels  ride  securely  near 
the  west  point,  under  shelter  of  a  bank  of  sand  and  beach  which  juts  out  from  the  shore. 

The  western  horn  of  the  bay,  called  Castell-Mawr,  and  the  Mount,  is  supposed,  from 
the  discovery  of  coins,  and  other  remains,  to  have  been  the  site  of  a  Roman  fortification, 
but  there  is  not  a  mark  left  on  the  surface  to  supporUthe  conjecture.  It  was  well  adapted 
for  a  military  station  by  its  natural  form  and  position,  being  very  steep  all  round,  and 

D  2  connected 


20  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

connected  with  the  land  only  by  a  low  isthmus.  On  the  north  side  of  it  there  are  some 
valuable  quarries  of  black  marble,  which  lies  in  horizontal  strata,  from  one  inch  to  two 
feet  in  thickness.  The  new  pier  at  Holyhead  is  principally  built  with  this  stone,  which  is 
ibund  in  very  convenient  slabs  for  the  purpose,  and,  from  its  hardness  and  compactness, 
is  formed  to  be  very  durable.  There  are  other  quarries  along  the  western  side  of  the  bay, 
from  which  limestone  is  procured  of  the  best  and  purest  quality,  and  exported  in  large 
quantities  to  Liverpool  and  other  places. 

Passing  over  the  sands  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  we  pursued  the  direct  road  to 
Beaumaris,  there  being  nothing  to  interest  us  in  the  more  circuitous  route  by  the  coast. 
When  we  had  reached  the  summit  of  the  high  land  which  rises  from  the  bay,  the  Caer- 
narvonshire mountains  opened  upon  us  most  majesticalhr,  drawn  out  in  along  range,  with 
their  whole  front  discovered  down  to  their  bases,  and  rather  ornamented  than  obscured 
by  a  few  white  clouds,  clinging  in  patches  and  wreaths  to  their  summits.  The  country 
about  us  continued  rough  and  dreary  till  we  approached  Baron  Hill,  the  seat  of  Lord 
Bulkley,  when  we  passed,  by  a  sudden  and  delightful  transition,  into  a  scene  of  the  most 
finished  elegance  and  cultivation,  with  the  mountains  still  in  view,  exhibiting  all  that 
nature  can  create  of  the  grand  and  the  romantic.  Arriving  at  the  brink  of  a  long  hill, 
we  descended  down  a  beautiful  avenue  of  trees,  catching  glimpses  through  the  foliage  to 
our  right  of  the  blue  water  of  the  Menai  and  the  mountains  beyond,  and  with  the  grounds 
of  Baron  Hill  to  our  left,  abundantly  planted  with  wood  of  a  fine  growth,  and  covered 
with  a  bright  verdure.  The  huge,  dark  Penmaen  Mawr  closed  the  vista  in  front.  At 
the  bottom  of  this  hill,  on  a  flat  bordering  the  Menai,  stands  Beaumaris,  a  remarkably 
pretty  town,  and  in  the  most  delightful  situation  that  can  be  imagined.  It  is  a  small 
town  of  two  or  three  streets,  which  are  all  very  respectable,  but  the  principal  one> 
fronting  the  water,  with  Avell-built  houses  on  both  sides,  spacious  and  well-paved,  and 
bounded  at  one  extremity  by  the  castle,  is  really  quite  imposing.  But  the  most  pleasing 
distinction  of  the  place,  in  our  eyes,  was  its  cleanliness,  for  which  it  might  be  noted  in  a 
country  far  more  addicted  to  soap  and  water  than  Wales.  The  appearance  of  the  people 
was  equally  calculated  to  put  one  in  good  humour  with  the  world.  Clean  and  decent  in 
their  dress,  and  healthy  in  their  looks,  they  all  carried  about  them  the  signs  of  comfort  and 
competency.  The  wholesomeness  and  smiling  neatness  of  this  little  town  were  peculiarly 
exhilarating  to  us,  for  how  striking  a  contrast  did  they  form  to  the  poverty,  the  gloom, 
and  the  wretchedness  of  Amlwch. 

The  three  towns  established  in  Wales  by  Edward  the  First,  Caernarvon,  Beaumaris, 
and  Conway,  were  of  a  class  very  much  superior  to  the  other  towns  of  the  country  at  the 
time,  and  they  continued  long  after  the  period  of  their  first  foundation  to  be  its  chief  seats 
of  education,  commerce,  and  all  the  pursuits  and  pleasures  that  are  common  to  civilized 
society.  They  derived  their  pre-eminence  not  only  from  the  valuable  privileges  originally 
conferred  upon  them  by  their  partial  founder,  but,  from  the  influence  and  authority  of  the 

foreigners 


Beaumaris  Castle,  Anglesea 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  21 

foreigners  who  composed  a  considerable  part  of  their  population,  and  who  were  more 
advanced  in  civilization,  more  refined  in  their  domestic  habits,  and  more  attached  to  all 
the  arts  of  peace  than  the  native  inhabitants  of  the  country.  Caernarvon  was  the  great 
seminary  of  learning,  to  which  young  men  were  sent  that  they  might  learn  to  read  and 
write,  and  talk  English,  all  exotic  accomplishments. — Beaumaris  was  the  seat  of  com- 
merce, where  they  learnt  to  grow  rich ;  and  Con  way  was  the  court  where  they  learnt  to  turn 
out  their  toes  and  make  a  bow.  Each  town  had  thus  its  distinctive  mark,  and  it  was 
usual,  alluding  at  once  to  the  celebrity  and  the  peculiar  and  exclusive  character  of  each, 
to  talk  of  the  lawyers  of  Caernarvon,  the  merchants  of  Beaumaris,  and  the  gentlemen  of 
Conway*.  There  appears  to  be  something  invidious  in  this  classification,  but  I  shall  not 
examine  it  too  curiously.  When  the  benefits  of  concord  and  civilization  were  more  ge- 
nerally diffused  over  Wales,  these  three  renowned  societies  naturally  became  less  conspi- 
cuous, and  they  finally,  from  other  causes  that  I  have  not  discovered,  were  entirely  divested 
of  their  ancient  distinctions.  Caernarvon,  at  the  present  day,  is  more  devoted  to  the  ex- 
portation of  slates  than  to  law  and  learning;  Beaumaris  has  no  trade;  and  Conway  has 
lost  all  its  polish  and  pride,  and  sunk  into  poverty  and  rags.  The  two  former,  however, 
the  one  with  trade,  and  the  other  without  trade,  still  maintain  their  respectability  and 
rank  among  the  first-rate  towns  of  the  principality. 

The  church  of  Beaumaris  is  among  the  few  in  Anglesey  that  a  stranger  is  in  no 
danger  of  confounding  with  the  barns.  It  is  a  neat  Gothic  building,  with  the  addition  of 
a  tower.  In  the  chancel  there  is  a  monument  which  is  well  worthy  of  notice.  It  repre- 
sents a  knight  and  his  lady,  lying  with  uplifted  hands  on  an  altar  tomb.  The  figures  are 
of  alabaster,  and  are  very  well  executed.  The  knight  is  in  complete  armour,  booted  and 
spurred,  his  head  resting  on  a  helmet,  and  a  lion  couchant  at  his  feet.  The  lady  is  attired 
in  long  robes,  with  a  profusion  of  embroidery  about  the  neck  and  bosom  :  two  small  dogs 
repose  at  her  feet.  In  compartments  on  each  front  of  the  tomb  are  small  figures  in  bas- 
relief,  habited  as  monks  and  knights.  The  monument  was  conveyed  to  this  church  from 
the  neighbouring  monastery  of  Llanvaes,  at  tlie  time  of  the  dissolution,  but  the  names  and 
family  of  the  persons,  for  whom  it  was  designed,  are  unknown.  It  may,  however,  carry 
down  to  posterity  many  other  names  than  those  which  it  was  intended  to  perpetuate, 
having  been  long  exposed  to  the  busy  fingers  of  four  rows  of  school-boys,  whose  forms 
were  conveniently  ranged  round  it,  and  who,  thus  tempted,  made  a  most  barbarous  use 
of  their  pen-knives.  When  the  figures  were  scratched  over  like  the  windows  of  a  country 
inn,  their  condition  was  first  noticed,  or  noticed,  at  least,  with  any  concern,  and  they 
were  rescued  from  further  mutilation. 

Beaumaris  castle,  the  last  erected  by  Edward  in  Wales,  is  in  no  respect  to  be  com- 
pared with  his  magnificent  castles  of  Caernarvon  and  Conway.     It  covers  a  great  extent 

*  Daincs  Harrington's  Miscellanies:  History  of  the  Gwedir  Family,  p.  417, 

Of 


22  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  ground,  and,  when  you  stand  immediately  under  its  walls,  its  broad,  massive  towers» 
have  a  grand  effect;  but  the  whole  building  is  so  disproportionately  low,  that,  when  seen  but 
from  a  very  short  distance,  it  appears  a  heavy,  sunken,  and  unvaried  mass,  without  either 
dignity  or  elegance.     The  outer  walls  are  flanked  by  ten  round  towers,  and  surrounded 
by  a  broad  ditch,  formerly  filled  with  water  from  the  sea,  with  which  it  was  connected  by 
a  canal.     By  this  contrivance,  vessels  laden  with  provisions  and  stores  for  the  town  and 
castle  were  enabled  to  advance  close  up  to  the  walls.     There  is  no  mark  of  the  canal  re- 
maining at  present,  but  the  rings,  to  which  the  vessels  were  moored,  are  still  to  be  seen  in 
the  walls  of  an  advanced  work,  called  the  Gunner's  Walk.     The  body  of  the  castle  is  a 
square,  with  round  towers  along  each  front  of  enormous  size.    The  grand  entrance,  facing 
the  sea,  is  through  a  low  arched  passage,  between  two  towers,  and  was  guarded  by  four 
portcullises.     This  leads  into  a  spacious  court  in  the  form  of  a  square,  with  obtuse  corners. 
Opposite  to  the  entrance  is  the  great  hall,  lighted  by  five  handsome  windows  in  front,  and 
bounded  at  each  extremity  by  a  round  tower  :  it  is  seventy-three  feet  in  length,  and  twenty- 
three  in  breadth.     This  must  have  been  a  noble  apartment,  and  it  still  retains  traces  of 
that  sumptuous  decoration  which  distinguishes  the  castles  of  Edward  from  all  others  in 
this  castle-breeding  country.     Within  the  east  wall  there  is  a  very  elegant  little  chapel, 
with  a  vaulted  roof  supported  by  ribs  springing  from  pilasters,  and  ornamented  all  round 
the  walls  by  rows  of  small  Gothic  arches. 

There  is  a  communication  round  the  buildings  of  the  inner  court  by  a  narrow  gallery, 
beneath  which,  at  certain  intervals,  are  eight  small  dungeons  that  must  have  been  entered 
by  means  of  ladders,  for  they  have  no  steps  to  them.  Dungeons,  the  castle  guide  in- 
sisted upon  calling  these  dismal  holes,  and  he  might  lose  many  a  fee,  were  he  to  give  up 
this  strong  hold  upon  the  curiosity  of  travellers;  but  it  appears  doubtful  whether  they 
were  not  intended  merely  as  repositories  for  stores,  as  two  of  the  large  round  towers  are 
said  to  have  been  reserved  for  prisoners.  All  the  floors  and  ceilings,  and  every  kind  of 
furniture  and  ornament  that  could  provoke  pillage,  have  been  removed  from  every  room 
and  corner  of  the  castle,  but  its  walls  are  in  good  preservation.  It  is  the  property  of  the 
crown,  and  is  now  in  the  custody  of  Sir  Robert  Williams. 

As  this  fortress  was  erected  after  the  power  of  the  Welsh  was  broken  down,  its  history 
is  unimportant.  It  long  proved  a  galling  burthen  to  the  people  of  the  country,  who,  irri- 
tated by  the  odious  tyranny  and  insolence  of  the  governor  and  his  garrison,  were  engaged 
in  perpetual  bickerings  with  them,  which  sometimes  burst  out  into  acts  of  violence,  but 
never  sufficiently  formidable  to  threaten  the  security  of  the  castle.  In  the  reign  of  Henry 
the  Seventh,  the  garrison  was  withdrawn,  and  the  castle  remained  unoccupied  till  the  time 
of  the  civil  war,  when  it  was  garrisoned  for  the  king,  to  whose  cause,  so  completely  had  all 
ancient  animosities  subsided,  the  whole  people  of  Anglesey  professed  themselves  to  be 
warmly  attached.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1648,  a  large  force  was  mustered  by  Thomas 
Lord  Bulkley,  and  other  eminent  men  of  the  island,  determined  to  assist  with  heart  and 

hand 


VOYAGE  HOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  23 

hand  in  restoring  the  king  to  liberty  and  his  throne;  but  all  this  ardour  of  loyalty  and 
vigour  of  preparation  ended  on  the  day  of  trial,  in  a  most  extraordinary  and  ridiculous 
exhibition  of  cowardice  and  imbecility.  On  the  advance  of  the  forces  of  the  parliament, 
under  General  Mytton,  the  order  of  battle  was  regularly  arranged,  and  there  appeared  a 
general  show  of  good  spirit  and  resolution.  But  this  was  not  of  long  duration.  The  de- 
fence of  Beaumaris  church  was  confided  to  a  chosen  captain,  who,  having  safely  lodged 
his  men  in  it  on  the  day  of  battle,  locked  the  gate,  put  the  key  into  his  pocket,  and  in* 
stantly  ran  away ;  not  making  his  appearance  again  till  all  danger  was  passed  by.  This 
hero  carried  an  imperishable  stigma  about  him  to  the  end  of  his  days,  under  the  nickname 
of  Captain  Church.  As  soon  as  the  troops  of  General  Mytton  were  seen  on  the  heights 
of  Penmaen  Mawr,  the  islanders  conceived  it  quite  time  to  begin,  and,  in  a  moment,  the 
drums  were  beaten,  trumpets  sounded,  and  heavy  vollies  of  great  and  small  shot  dis- 
charged into  the  sea.  This  was  the  most  vehement  scene  of  the  day's  fight,  and,  had  the 
action  between  the  two  parties  been  left  to  be  decided  with  the  sea  between  them,  there 
is  no  knowing  what  might  have  been  the  event,  but  the  invaders,  not  to  be  frightened  by 
people  firing  small  shot  at  them  when  two  leagues  distant,  continued  to  advance,  crossed 
the  strait,  and,  meeting  only  with  a  short,  feeble,  and  disorderly  resistance,  made  them- 
selves masters  of  the  whole  island.  There  was  no  want  of  bravery  and  conduct  in  the 
chief  leaders  of  the  Anglesey  forces,  but  their  example  and  authority  were  lost  amidst 
the  general  cowardice  and  confusion. 

Beaumaris  has  many  visitors  in  the  summer  season,  and  I  know  of  no  spot  in  the 
kingdom  that  offers  more  attractions  to  those  who  have  any  perception  of  what  is  beautiful, 
picturesque,  and  sublime  in  nature.     In  front  of  the  castle  there  is  a  delightful  walk  upon 
the  margin  of  the  Menai,  here  expanded  into  a  fine  bay,  bounded  on  the  opposite  shore 
by  mountains,  and  opening  within  view  into  the  main  sea.     The  entrance  of  the  bay  is 
guarded  on  the  east  side  by  the  vast  promontory  of  Llandudno,  or  Ormes  Head,  stretching 
far  into  the  sea,  and  terminating  at  its  extreme  point  in  a  perpendicular  precipice.     Its 
eastern  extremity  is  connected  with  the  main  land  by  a  flat  marsh,  which  is  not  visible 
from  this  distance,  and  the  cape  seems  to  rise  like  a  mountain  from  the  sea.     Within  this 
grand  boundary  the  Conway  discharges  itself  into  the  bay  through  a  wide  opening,  on 
the  southern  side  of  which  appear  the  bleached  cliffs  of  Penmaen  Bach;  further  on,  the  tre- 
mendous Penmaen  Mawr,  descending  from  an  elevation  of  five  hundred  yards  with  one 
bold  sweep  to  the  sea,  and  on  to  the  southward,  mountains  beyond  mountains  as  far  as  the 
eye  can  reach.     From  the  entrance  of  the  bay  to  Penmaen  Mawr  the  coast  appears  wild, 
rugged,   and  naked;  but  further  south  the  mountains  recede,  their  lower  parts  sloping 
gently  down,  and  variegated  with  meadows  and  corn  fields,  till  they  terminate  in  a  narrow 
plain,  spread  with  the  same  warm  colouring  down  to  the  water's  edge.     The  corn  had 
now  a  golden  hue,  which  >vas  prettily  intermixed  with  the  bright  green  of  the  meadows, 
and  the  enclosures  being  remarkably  small,  and  still  further  diminished  by  distance,  and 

the 


24  VOYAGE    ROUND    GRP.AT    BRITAIN. 

the  vast  forms  by  which  they  were  bounded,  resembled  a  rich  Mosaic,  inlaid  at  the  base 
of  the  dark  mountains,  and  here  and  there  creeping  up  their  sides,  till  suddenly  checked 
by  heath  and  rock.  We  had  one  clear,  calm  day,  for  the  perfect  enjoyment  of  this  glorious 
prospect,  when  the  broad,  resplendent  surface  of  the  Menai,  enlivened  by  shipping,  and 
its  rich  and  chequered  border  on  the  opposite  shore,  and  the  mountains,  their  multiplied 
summits  sharply  marked  out,  and  their  long  front  lighted  up  by  the  western  sun,  composed 
a  picture  in  which  grace,  and  beaut}7,  and  gaiety,  were  so  contrasted  with  the  rude  and  the 
sublime,  that  it  affected  the  mind  like  a  wonder  of  enchantment. 

The  Anglesey  side  of  the  bay  has  some  beauties,  but  they  are  of  a  more  ordinary 
character.  Priestholm,  or  Puffin  Island,  forms  the  western  point  of  the  bay,  from  whence 
the  coast  continues  tame  and  uninteresting  till  the  castle  of  Beaumaris  presents  itself,  and 
the  town  close  upon  the  water,  with  the  well-wooded  grounds  of  Baron  Hill  rising  behind 
it,  their  highest  point  crowned  with  a  handsome  mansion.  A  lofty  hill  laid  out  in  mea- 
dows, and  sprinkled  with  wood,  bounds  the  town  to  the  south,  and  closes  the  prospect  on 
this  coast  of  the  Menai.  I  am  sorry  to  include,  in  this  line  of  view,  an  abomination  in  the 
shape  of  an  ornamental  building  (so  it  is  called),  stuck  up  on  the  top  of  a  round  bare  hill, 
to  the  right  of  the  castle,  a  thing  which  one  does  not  know  whether  to  reprobate  most  for 
its  uselessness  or  its  ugliness.  One  may  guess,  from  some  huge,  disproportioned  battle- 
ments, and  a  wooden  flag,  that  the  object  is  intended  to  represent  a  fort,  but  it  is  alto- 
gether so  misshapen,  and  so  bedaubed  with  white-wash  and  black-wash  to  make  it  look 
pretty,  that  these  partial  indications  of  meaning  serve  only  to  make  it  the  more  ridiculous. 
Jt  may  be  thought  scarcely  worth  while  to  have  noticed  such  a  thing,  and  I  should  have 
thought  so  too,  had  it  been  farther  from  Baron  Hill,  where  good  taste  has  combined  so 
much  to  be  admired,  that  it  is  quite  a  pity  to  see  the  place  disfigured  by  a  blot  like  this,  so 
provokingly  stationed,  too,  that  one  must  see  it.  A  windmill,  I  understand,  was  taken 
down  to  make  room  for  it,  much  to  the  inconvenience  of  the  town,  and  certainly  to  the 
disadvantage  of  the  scenery,  for  any  thing  or  nothing  would  be  preferable  to  this  senseless 
piece  of  trumpery. 

The  perfect  beauty  of  the  great  view  in  front  of  Beaumaris  depends  very  materially 
on  the  state  of  the  tide,  for  at  low  water  almost  the  whole  bed  of  the  bay  is  left  dry. 
There  is  a  tradition  to  be  heard  from  every  body  living  in  this  part  of  the  country,  that 
this  bay  was  once  a  fine  estate,  which  was  overwhelmed  by  a  sudden  irruption  of  the  sea, 
and  from  present  appearances  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  tradition  is  not 
ill-founded.  The  mean  breadth  of  the  bay,  from  shore  to  shore,  is  about  five  miles;  but 
at  low  water  the  sea  is  confined  to  the  ancient  channel  of  the  strait  which  lies  near  to  the 
Anglesey  shore,  and  is  not  quite  half  a  mile  in  breadth.  Vessels  of  the  largest  burden 
may  navigate  this  channel  at  all  periods  of  the  tide,  the  depth  of  water  being  never  less 
than  seven  fathoms;  but  the  space  between  its  eastern  border  and  the  Caernarvonshire 
shore  becomes  at  half  ebb  a  great  plain  of  sand,  called  the  Lavan  Sands,  or  Wylofaen, 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  25 

the  Place  of  Weeping,  from  the  lamentations  of  those  who  were  overwhelmed,  or  who  saw 
their  houses  and  lands  overwhelmed  by  the  sea.  On  the  shore  at  Beaurnaris,  the  sea  has 
evidently,  at  some  period,  conceded  something  to  the  land,  the  Green  being  merely  a  bed 
of  beach  with  a  thin  turf  spread  over  it.  At  the  southern  extremity  of  the  town  is  Or- 
mond's  Point,  a  similar  kind  of  bank,  projecting  into  the  strait,  though  not  covered  with 
earth;  but  these  formations  must  have  existed  prior  to  the  great  inundation,  for  the  sea  is 
now  obviously  encroaching  upon  the  Anglesey  coast  of  the  bay,  and,  according  to  ancient 
records,  the  marsh  on  which  Beaumaris  is  built,  and  from  which  it  takes  its  name,  was 
formerly  of  much  greater  extent  than  at  present,  and  covered  with  fine  bulrushes.  Be- 
tween the  Green  and  Ormond's  Point,  the  sea  flows  up  to  the  very  walls  of  the  town. 

We  were  detained  at  Beaumaris  by  rain,  accompanied  by  a  storm  of  wind,  which 
commenced  on  the  night  of  the  5th  of  August,  and  continued,  with  little  intermission,  for 
eight-and-forty  hours,  blowing  with  all  the  violence  of  a  winter  gale.  We  heard  melan- 
choly accounts  of  corn  beaten  down,  and  trees  stripped  of  their  fruit  by  this  furious  storm, 
which,  both  in  violence  and  duration,  exceeded  any  that  had  ever  been  remembered,  at 
such  a  season  of  the  year,  by  the  oldest  seaman  in  the  place.  There  were  many  vessels 
riding  in  the  bay  off  the  town,  but  it  is  so  well  sheltered  by  the  land,  and  has  such  firm 
anchorage,  that  it  is  a  safe  roadstead  in  all  weathers,  and  one  of  the  greatest  importance 
to  shipping  from  Liverpool,  and  other  ports  to  the  eastward. 

A  watering-place  in  rainy  weather,  with  all  the  readable  books  of  the  library  engaged, 
must  be  admitted  to  be  rather  dull  and  fatiguing;  but  our  time  was  a  little  enlivened  by 
the  intervention  of  the  market  day,  which  peopled  the  street  with  a  busy  crowd  in  front 
of  our  window,  and  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  ascertaining,  what  no  man,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances of  wind  and  weather,  could  be  indifferent  to,  that  the  women  of  Beaumaris 
and  its  neighbourhood  are  remarkable  for  their  beauty.  A  man,  perhaps,  could  travel  in 
few  parts  of  this  country  without  seeing  pretty  women,  but  I  do  not  merely  intend  to  say 
of  the  women  of  Beaumaris,  that  you  may  here  and  there  see  a  pretty  face  among  them, 
but,  that  you  can  scarcely  fix  your  eye  upon  an  ugly  one, — if  such  a  term  can  have  any  re- 
ference to  the  sex.  Their  beauty  is  not  set  off  by  the  national  dress,  and  indeed  it  is  a 
strong  proof  of  its  transcendency,  that  it  appears  so  striking  in  spite  of  it.  They  indulge 
in  no  showy  and  sprightly  colours,  no  gay  ribbons,  nor  finery  of  any  kind,  such  as  distin- 
guishes the  country  lasses  of  England:  rough,  dark,  woollen  garments  form  both  their 
summer  and  winter  clothing ;  add  to  these  a  dark  blue  or  brown  cloak  of  coarse  cloth, 
and  a  man's  hat,  and  you  have  a  WTelsh  beauty  in  all  the  pride  of  her  dress.  The  men 
affect  the  same  sober  colours  in  their  clothing  from  head  to  foot,  and  as  the  whole  as- 
sembly stood  crowded  together  in  the  street,  they  composed  a  most  dingy  mob,  with  so 
much  conformity  in  the  dress  of  the  sexes,  that,  had  it  not  been  for  some  pretty  fair  faces, 
smiling  among  the  beards  and  whiskers,  one  should  not  have  supposed  that  there  had  been 

VOL.  ii.  E  any 


26  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

any  females  in  the  company.  This  homeliness  of  dress,  and  these  hiding  colours,  are  apt 
to  encourage  sluttishness  and  dirtiness,  sins  with  which  I  have  ventured,  on  more  than  one 
occasion,  to  reproach  the  women  of  Wales,  but  they  are  not,  in  any  degree,  attributable 
to  the  lasses  of  Beaumaris,  who,  if  they  are  negligent  of  all  other  ornament,  have  a  scru- 
pulous regard  for  the  grace  of  cleanliness. 

On  the  return  of  fine  weather,  we  set  forward  to  explore  the  western  coast  of  the  bay. 
On  the  shore,  about  a  mile  north  of  the  town,  are  the  remains  of  Llanfaes,  or  the  Friars,  a 
religious  house,  founded  by  Prince  Llewellyn  ap  Jorwerth,  over  the  grave  of  his  princess 
Joan,  a  natural  daughter  of  King  John.  The  coffin  of  this  illustrious  personage,  which  is 
of  stone,  and  rather  rude  workmanship,  was  for  many  years  used  here  as  a  watering- 
trough,  but  it  was  lately  rescued  from  this  gross  indignity,  and  now  stands  on  a  chosen 
spot  in  Lord  Bulkeley's  grounds,  under  a  small  Gothic  temple.  The  friars  were  Fran- 
ciscans, who,  not  content  to  be  at  peace,  and  grow  fat  according  to  the  most  approved 
system  of  monastic  life,  entered  into  all  the  stormy  politics  of  the  times,  and  exposed 
themselves,  in  consequence,  to  some  very  rough  treatment.  In  the  insurrection  which 
burst  out  soon  after  the  death  of  Llewellyn,  the  last  prince  of  Wales,  their  house  and 
church  were  razed  to  the  ground,  and  all  their  property  pillaged  or  destroyed.  They  rose 
again  after  this  reverse  through  the  charity  of  Edward  the  Second,  but,  on  the  next  op- 
portunity, called  down  upon  themselves  a  still  more  terrible  visitation,  by  meddling  in 
the  cause  of  Owen  Glendour,  who  was  favoured,  indeed,  by  all  the  monks  of  this  order  in 
Wales.  On  the  very  first  appearance  of  Henry  in  Wales,  which  took  place  in  the  first 
year  of  Owen's  rebellion,  he  directed  his  vengeance  against  Llanfaes,  plundered  the  con- 
vent, slew  several  of  the  friars,  and  carried  off  the  rest  as  prisoners.  These,  however,  he 
afterwards  set  at  liberty,  and  made  restitution  to  the  convent,  taking  care  to  prevent  the 
recurrence  of  any  future  cabals  against  him,  by  peopling  it  with  English  recluses. 

The  house  of  Sir  Robert  Williams  stands  close  behind  the  remains  of  the  ancient 
buildings,  which  are  now  degraded  into  stables  and  a  barn.  The  church,  which  forms  the 
barn,  has  been  sadly  abused  and  disguised,  but  some  Gothic  arches,  decorated  with  a  little 
sculpture,  may  still  be  traced  in  the  walls.  The  stables  occupy  the  burial-place,  and  the 
posts  of  the  stalls  are  bedded  in  crumbling  coffins  and  bones.  I  know  not  whether  a 
reason  can  be  pointed  out  against  a  violation  of  this  kind;  but,  before  we  can  pause  to 
find  one,  a  feeling  springs  up  against  it,  too  ready  and  unpremeditated  to  doubt  that  it  is 
a  right  one.  The  buildings,  as  a  barn  and  stables,  are  very  unsightly  objects  in  front  of 
the  modern  mansion,  but  the  proprietor,  in  consideration  of  their  former  character,  would 
not  consent  to  pull  them  down,  though,  verily,  they  are  so  outraged  and  transformed,  that 
he  has  but  little  excuse  to  his  taste  for  keeping  them  up. 

In  the  year  818,  Llanfaes  was  the  scene  of  a  bloody  battle  between  the  Welsh  and 
the  West-Saxons  under  Egbert:  the  latter  prevailed,  and,  following  up  their  victory, 

gained 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  27 

gained  possession  of  the  whole  island  of  Anglesey,  and  first  gave  it  its  Saxon  name. 
Merfyn  Frych,  who  was  the  leader  of  the  Welsh,  and  prince  of  the  country,  speedily  re- 
paired his  losses,  and,  falling  resolutely  upon  the  usurpers,  drove  them  again  from  the  land. 

Not  far  from  hence,  behind  a  farm-house  near  the  sea  side,  some  scanty  remains  were 
pointed  out  to  us  of  a  small  castle,  once  apparently  a  square,  with  towers  at  the  corners, 
and  surrounded  by  a  ditch.  It  is  called  Castell  Aber  Llienawg,  and  was  founded  in  1098, 
by  Hugh  Lupus,  Earl  of  Chester,  and  Hugh,  Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  who,  having  gained  an 
easy  entrance  into  Anglesey  through  the  baseness  and  treachery  of  some  of  the  chieftains 
of  Wales,  repaid  the  favour  by  laying  waste  the  country,  and  massacring  the  inhabitants*. 
These  savages  are  said  to  have  committed  excesses  in  cruelty  that  startled  even  their  own 
merciless  age,  living  here  like  two  wild  beasts  in  their  den.  Fortunately  for  the  miserable 
people,  their  reign  was  soon  cut  off  by  the  appearance  of  another  wild  beast  on  the  coast, 
the  pirate  Magnus,  with  a  fleet  from  Norway.  He  was  driven  on  to  this  coast  acci- 
dentally, but,  not  caring  where  he  commenced  his  depredations,  he  instantly  prepared  to 
land  his  forces,  and  the  earls,  apprized  of  his  approach,  were  ready  to  oppose  him.  The 
Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  mounted  on  a  spirited  horse,  and  cased  from  head  to  foot  in  strong 
armour,  penetrable  only  through  the  eyes,  rode  boldly  down  to  the  beach,  and  dashed 
into  the  water ;  when  Magnus,  standing  on  the  prow  of  the  foremost  ship,  aimed  an  arrow 
at  him,  which,  marvellously  finding  its  way  to  one  of  the  small  spots,  through  which  alone 
he  was  vulnerable,  entered  his  brain,  and  laid  him  a  corpse  in  the  sea.  The  victor,  when 
he  saw  him  fall  dead  from  his  horse,  exultingly  cried  out  in  his  own  language,  *  Leit  loup,' 
Let  him  leap-f-.  This  expert  aim  at  once  disarmed  Castell  Aber  Llienawg  of  its  terrors,  and 
gave  the  natives  a  long  reprieve  from  Saxon  oppression. 

After  leaving  Beaumaris  there  was  little  to  interest  us  particularly  in  the  natural 
scenery  on  this  coast  of  the  bay,  but  there  is  no  station  in  the  country  from  whence  you 
have  so  fine  a  view  of  the  Snowdon  Mountains.  We  saw  them  on  this  day  under  some 
of  the  grandest  possible  effects ;  with  dark,  heavy  clouds,  the  remaining  signs  of  the  late 
storm,  rolling  among  them,  their  summits  peering  through  at  intervals,  and  occasional 
gleams  and  flashes  of  sun-shine  playing  upon  them.  Penmaen  Mawr,  overhanging  the 
sea  with  its  broken  crags,  formed  a  very  sublime  object,  for,  though  a  mountain  of  only 
the  third  magnitude,  its  abrupt  ascent  makes  it  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the 
range. 

We  continued  our  walk  to  the  priory  of  Penmon,  situated  near  the  entrance  of  the 
bay,  and  at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore.  This  is  a  pretty,  sequestered  spot,  where  a 
venerable  church,  and  an  aged  ruin  near  it,  shewing  their  grey  walls  behind  a  cluster  of 
trees,  have  a  very  picturesque  effect.  The  buildings  are  somewhat  disguised,  but  not  so 
degraded  as  those  of  Llanfaes,  and  preserving  enough  of  their  proper  character  for  the 

*  Powel,  p.  117.  f  Hoare's  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  p.  105. 

E  2  support 


28  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

support  of  their  dignity,  are  rendered  the  more  interesting,  both  to  the  eye  and  the  mind, 
by  the  touches  of  time  and  decay. 

A  religious  house  was  first  founded  here  by  the  fair-faced  Saint  Seiriol  in  the  sixth 
century,  under  the  auspices  of  Maelgwyn  Gwynedd,  a  prince,  who,  after  a  life  of  sin, 
gnew  repentant  as  he  approached  the  grave,  and  suddenly  became  a  profuse  patron  of  re- 
ligious institutions.  The  neighbouring  island  of  Priestholm,  distinguished  also  by  the 
name  of  Ynys  Seiriol,  was  inhabited  by  monks  on  the  same  establishment.  The  Priory 
was  again  endoAved  by  Llewellyn  ap  Jorwerth,  who  filled  it  with  monks  of  the  Benedictine 
order,  and  dedicated  it  to  St.  Mary.  Its  revenues  at  the  dissolution  were  4>7l.  1 5s.  3d. 

The  remains  at  Penmon  consist  of  the  church  and  the  refectory,  which  both  bear  the 
stamp  of  great  antiquity.  There  are  some  other  remnants,  which,  I  imagine,  may  have 
once  been  parts  of  the  monastic  buildings,  but  these  I  could  not  disentangle  to  my  exact 
satisfaction,  from  their  present  intimate  coalition  with  a  dairy  and  a  pig-sty.  The  build- 
ing called  the  refectory  has  been  divided  into  three  stories,  the  upper  chambers  probably 
being  the  dormitory.  It  is  built  with  all  the  strength  of  a  military  work,  with  walls  six 
feet  in  thickness,  and  small  chinks  through  them  for  windows,  it  being  necessary,  perhaps, 
in  those  predatory  times,  to  protect  the  gpod  monks  during  the  momentous  business  of 
their  meals,  from  the  danger  of  any  sudden  interruption. 

The  church  was  originally  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  but  the  north  transept  has  been 
destroyed,  and  there  are  now  three  wings  attached  to  the  tower  of  unequal  height,  the 
largest  of  which  is  a  farm-house.  The  choir  is  still  in  use,  and  all  its  appearances  of  an- 
tiquity have  been  smoothed  over  by  modern  alterations;  but  the  other  divisions  of  the 
building,  if  they  have  not  escaped  decay,  have  not  suffered  from  improvements,  and,  in 
those  parts  which  are  entire,  furnish  good  specimens  of  unmixed  Saxon  architecture.  The 
tower  rests  upon  four  semicircular  arches,  three  of  which  are  much  defaced  and  mutilated, 
but  that  ^vhich  leads  into  the  nave  is  tolerably  perfect.  Some  of  the  columns  by  which  it 
was  supported  are  missing:  those  which  remain  are  small,  and  of  irregular  forms,  one  round 
and  plain,  one  round  and  fluted,  and  one  quadrangular,  with  simple  bases  and  capitals. 
The  faces  of  all  the  arches  are  decorated  with  zig-zag  mouldings. 

The  nave  has  no  side  aisles,  and  is  reduced  to  a  mere  shell,  with  all  the  windows 
blocked  up,  except  two,  which  are  round-headed,  gradually  widening  inward,  and  present- 
ing only  a  narrow  slit  to  the  light.  The  remaining  transept  is  a  very  small  square  building, 
with  its  walls  ornamented  on  all  sides  by  ranges  of  small  round  arches,  springing  from 
plain  and  fluted  pilasters.  This  is  the  best  preserved  part  of  the  whole  church,  but  the 
windows  are  all  closed  by  its  junction  with  the  farm-house. 

This  little  church  was  formerly  in  high  repute,  and  was  considered  to  be  a  most 
fortunate  place  of  marriage,  but  from  what  motives  of  preference  it  was  selected,  or  why 
it  is  now  despised,  I  have  not  ascertained.     Adjoining  it  there  is  a  holy  well,  once  holy,  at 
least,  which,  as  the  spectator  very  clearly  perceives  from  the  pomp  of  architecture  sur- 
rounding 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  29 

rounding  it,  had  once  something  more  to  give  than  its  water.  A  small  shed,  or  temple, 
perhaps,  I  might  say,  is  raised  over  it,  one  side  of  which  is  formed  by  a  natural  wall  of 
grey  limestone,  on  the  top  of  which  grows  an  ash-tree,  whose  branches  spread  like  a  canopy 
over  the  building,  making  it  at  least  a- very  picturesque  object.  A  square  space,  inclosed 
by  a  wall,  paved  and  furnished  with  stone  seats  all  round,  forms  a  kind  of  vestibule,  in 
which,  perhaps,  some  little  preparatory  ceremony  was  necessary  before  admission  could 
be  gained  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  which  is  also  supplied  with  seats.  Whether  the 
well  has  now  lost  all  its  virtues  I  know  not,  but  I  feel  fully  authorized  in  declaring  that  it 
has  lost  all  its  fame,  for  I  myself  beheld  on  one  of  the  seats,  and  in  the  inner  temple  too, 
a  melancholy  proof  of  its  subservience  to  the  most  vulgar  purposes,  in  a  washing-tub  and 
a  piece  of  soap.  St.  Seiriol,  from  whom  every  charm  of  which  these  waters  were  the  in- 
strument was  supposed  to  emanate,  had  himself  a  great  reverence  for  wells,  and  his. 
favourite  one  at  Clorach,  where,  as  I  have  before  mentioned,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  meet- 
ing his  friend  Gybi  Felyn,  has  a  similar  kind  of  temple  over  it,  with  the  same  accommo- 
dations, as  this  at  Penmon,  and  still  preserves,  1  believe,  some  little  reputation  in  its 
neighbourhood.  An  old  woman  at  the  farm-house  here  informed  me,  that  she  remem- 
bered when  this  well  was  considered  to  be  of  at  least  as  much  service  to  the  parish  as  the 
parson,  but  what  were  the  particular  rules  and  rites  of  the  mysterious  sessions  in  the 
temple,  she  either  could  not  or  would  not  disclose. 

We  returned  from  hence  to  Beaumaris,  and  employed  our  next  day  in  an  excursion, 
to  Priestholm,  which  lies  four  miles  north-east  of  the  town,  and  distant  about  a  mile  from 
the  main.  A  dangerous  shoal,  called  the  Causeway,  occupies  the  greater  part  of  the  Sound, 
but  there  is  a  narrow  channel  through  it  eight  fathoms  deep,  which  is  the  only  entrance 
from  the  northward  for  large  vessels  into  Beaumaris  Bay.  There  is  another  passage 
between  the  outer  coast  of  the  island  and  the  edge  of  the  Lavan  Sands,  but  it  is  navigable 
only  for  vessels  of  a  very  small  class.  We  found  a  high  breaking  sea  on  the  Causeway, 
but  the  water  was  smooth  under  its  lee,  and  we  landed  without  difficulty.  Our  boatmen 
here  communicated  to  us  a  tradition  tending  to  confirm  the  account  which  I  have  before 
stated  of  the  wide  depredations  committed  on  this  coast  by  the  sea.  They  assured  us 
that  the  same  priest  who  preached  at  Priestholm  officiated  also  at  the  church  on  the  op- 
posite promontory  of  Llandudno,  and  that  he  walked  over  by  a  straight  road  from  point 
to  point.  They  did  not  mean  to  insinuate  that  he  had  any  preternatural  power,  and  that 
he  walked  upon  the  waters,  but  that  he  had  a  firm  dry  footpath  to  stand  on,  where  now 
the  sea  flows,  and  which  must  have  completely  blocked  up  the  mouth  of  the  bay.  With 
this  barrier  drawn  between  the  two  promontories,  the  Menai  would  find  a  passage  into  the 
sea  through  Priestholm  Sound,  and  the  Conway  must  either  have  flowed  through  the  low 
land  now  covered  by  the  Lavan  Sands,  and  have  discharged  itself  into  the  Strait,  or  have 
had  an  outlet  between  the  eastern  extremity  of  Llandudno  and  the  main  coast,  which 
seems  to  be  probable,,  as  this  space  is  merely  a  low  neck  of  sandy  ground,  with  every 

appearance 


30  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

appearance  of  an  alluvial  formation.  Supposing  thus  that  the  whole  area  of  Beaumaris 
Bay  was  formerly  dry  land,  and  leaving  a  channel  half  a  mile  broad  for  the  Menai,  there 
must  have  been  an  estate  lost,  more  than  four  miles  in  breadth,  and  at  least  eight  miles 
in  length.  This  calamity,  it  is  imagined,  happened  at  the  same  time  when  the  Cantrer 
Gwaelod  in  Cardigan  Bay  was  inundated,  and  indeed  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
honour  of  the  tradition  to  place  the  event  far  back,  otherwise  it  will  clash  with  certain 
positive  and  authentic  records  referring  to  Priestholm  and  Llandudno,  under  the  forms 
and  relations  which  they  still  preserve.  Independent,  however,  of  all  traditions,  it  is  very 
evident  from  the  present  aspect  of  the  Welsh  coast,  from  its  deep  indentations,  the  fre- 
quency of  long  narrow  promontories,  and  the  numerous  small  islands  scattered  about  it, 
and,  still  more  directly,  from  the  occurrence  of  large  tracts  of  loamy  soil  and  of  peat  moss, 
extending  far  from  the  shore,  that  the  sea  has  made  great  advances  both  upon  its  western 
and  northern  fronts.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  sands  which  border  the  coasts  of 
Merioneth  and  Caernarvonshire  were  once  forests  or  cultivated  land,  forming  extended 
plains  at  the  base  of  the  mountains.  These  plains  are  now  reduced  to  narrow  strips,  which 
the  sea  still  continues  to  encroach  upon,  and  will,  in  the  course  of  time,  swallow  up,  and 
meet  an  effectual  barrier  in  the  mountains  against  its  further  progress. 

Priestholm  is  about  a  mile  in  length  and  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  bounded  on  three  sides 
by  inaccessible  precipices,  and  on  the  fourth  by  a  very  steep  bank.  It  is  composed  en- 
tirely of  a  mass  of  lime-stone,  covered  with  a  layer  of  earth,  and  rising  at  its  highest  point 
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  On  clambering  up  to  the 
top  we  found  ourselves  in  a  wilderness  of  brambles,  nettles,  and  thistles,  with  some  very 
luxuriant  thickets  of  elder.  The  island  shelves  down  on  each  side  from  its  summit  to  the 
verge  of  the  cliffs,  but  with  the  most  considerable  slope  on  the  northern  side,  which  is 
clear  ground,  and  gives  pasture  to  a  few  sheep.  There  is  a  considerable  depth  of  soil 
upon  every  part  of  it,  and  it  would  no  doubt  repay  the  toil  and  charges  of  cultiva- 
tion, but  I  believe  that  it  has  never  known  the  care  of  man  since  the  days  of  its  ancient 
inhabitants  the  Monks.  The  only  building  upon  it  is  an  old  square  tower  crowned  with 
a  low  spire,  about  which  are  heaps  of  stones  and  rubbish,  the  remains  of  other  build- 
ings. Quantities  of  human  bones  may  be  seen  in  various  parts  of  the  island,  proofs,  says 
Mr.  Pennant,  of  its  reputed  sanctity,  and  the  superstitious  wish  of  the  people  to  have  this 
made  the  place  of  their  interment.  Prince  Maelgwyn  Gwyneth  and  St.  Seiriol  are  among 
the  illustrious  personages  whose  remains  repose  in  its  holy  ground. 

Giraldus  observes  of  Priestholm  in  his  time,  that  it  was  inhabited  by  hermits  who 
divided  their  time  between  agricultural  pursuits  and  religious  exercises,  but  who,  notwith- 
standing the  general  sobriety  and  simplicity  of  their  lives,  were  sometimes  subject  to  the 
same  passions  which  disturb  the  world  at  large,  and  wrangled  and  quarrelled  like  other 
people.  It  seems,  however,  that  they  were  regularly  warned  of  the  indecency  of  these 
excesses,  by  some  little  monitors  in  the  disguise  of  a  host  of  mice,  which,  whenever  they 

perceived 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  31 

perceived  any  thing  like  angry  looks  or  intemperate  language  among  the  brotherhood, 
made  an  instant  and  destructive  attack  upon  their  larder  (a  tender  place !)  and  never  left 
it  till  they  had  starved  them  into  more  decorous  behaviour,  when  they  retreated  to  their 
holes,  and  peace  and  plenty  were  again  restored  to  the  island.  "  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered 
at,"  says  Giraldus,  "  if  the  servants  of  God  sometimes  disagree,  since  Jacob  and  Esau 
contended  in  the  womb  of  Rebecca,  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  differed ;  the  disciples  also 
of  Jesus  disputed  which  of  them  should  be  the  greatest;  for  these  are  the  temptations  of 
human  infirmity ;  yet  virtue  is  often  made  perfect  by  infirmity,  and  faith  is  increased  by 
tribulations."* 

The  island  is  at  present  valued  only  as  a  Puffin-warren,  and  our  principal  object  in 
visiting  it  was  to  see  the  birds,  which  associate  here  in  far  greater  multitudes  than  we  had 
ever  seen  in  any  one  place  during  the  whole  course  of  our  voyage.     We  were  struck  with 
their  numbers  on  first  reaching  the  summit  of  the  island,  but  when  we  arrived  within  view 
of  the  declivity  on  its  eastern  side,  a  host  of  them  burst  upon  our  sight  that  quite  con- 
founded us.     They  covered  the  surface  of  the  ground  like  swarms  of  insects,  tens  of  thou- 
sands were  wheeling  and  screaming  in  the  air,  and  a  close  broad  column  of  them  in  the 
sea  encircled  the  island  like  a  belt.     They  consisted  of  Puffins,  Gulls,  Terns,  Guillemots, 
and  Razor-Bills,  which  have  all  their  respective  settlements.     The  Puffins  burrow  in  the 
bank  sloping  to  the  eastward,  the  Gulls  and  Terns  build  their  nests  among  the  grass  and 
weeds  on  the  face  of  the  south  cliff,  and  the  Guillemots  and  Razor-Bills  sit  upon  the  ledges 
of  the  rocks  on  the  east  and  north  cliffs ;  but  they  all  mingle  together  on  the  sea  and  in 
the  air,  joining  in  one  general  cry,  in  which  the  loud  wild  whistle  of  the  Gulls  is  predomi- 
nant.   The  Puffins  are  the  most  multitudinous,  and  the  most  entertaining  in  their  habits 
and  manners.     The  bank  which  they  occupy  is  five  or  six  hundred  yards  in  length,  and 
about  a  hundred  yards  in  breadth,  worn  to  the  bare  earth,  and  as  full  of  holes  as  a  pepper- 
box.    Over  this  surface  they  were  arranged  in  various  figures,  in  lines  and  in  circles,  with 
here  and  there  a  cluster,  so  thickly  crowded,  that  we  could  not  see  the  ground  on  which 
they  stood,  and  a  long  single  file  at  the  very  verge  of  the  precipice,  arrayed  with  singular 
regularity.     Their  plumage  is  exceedingly  clean  and  glossy,  and  their  mixed  colours,  black, 
white,  and  red,  formed  a  variegated  border  to  the  island  that  had  a  very  pretty  effect. 
They  were  remarkably  tame  and  stupid,  retreating  before  us  so  slowly,  that  we  could  easily 
have  knocked  them  down  with  our  sticks.     Our  boatmen,  not  moved  to  generosity  by  this 
confidence,  pelted  them  with  stones,  but  these  did  not  make  them  fly  away,  and  when 
two  or  three  of  them  were  struck  dead,  the  sight  made  no  impression  on  the  others,  which 
continued  gazing  at  us  as  if  they  had  never  seen  man  before  or  never  known  his  cruel ty. 
This  unsuspecting  tameness  is  very  extraordinary,  for  these  birds  suffer  the  most  unrelent- 
ing persecution,  and  half  of  the  holes  in  the  bank  had  already  been  robbed  of  their  treasure. 

*  Hoare's  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  p..  106. 

But 


32  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

But  though  thus  careless  of  their  safety,  or  rather  ignorant  of  their  danger,  they  will  not 
suffer  themselves  to  be  actually  taken  hold  of  without  the  most  resolute  resistance,  and 
will  defend  their  holes  to  the  last  extremity. 

When  we  sat  down  upon  the  bank,  they  became  still  more  bold  and  fearless,  and  we 
soon  found  ourselves  completely  enveloped  by  them;  some  encompassing  us  on  the  ground, 
others  glancing  by  us  on  the  wing,  and  sometimes  the  whole  host  rising  at  once  from  the 
ground  and  performing  a  short  evolution  round  us,  with  a  concert  of  horrid  squalls,  such  as 
no  human  language  can  possibly  describe.  We  observed  many  of  them  return  from  the 
sea  with  sprats  in  their  mouths  for  their  young,  some  with  two  and  three  at  a  time  lying 
across  the  bill.  On  entering  their  holes  thus  provided,  they  manifested  some  suspicion  of 
us,  and  stood  hesitatingly  for  some  time  with  their  eyes  fixed  upon  us,  as  if  they  feared  to 
direct  our  attention  to  the  objects  of  their  care.  Whether  the  bird  that  returned  with 
three  sprats  at  a  time  in  its  mouth  caught  them  with  a  single  snap,  or  whether  it  could 
possibly  catch  them  by  successive  snaps,  we  long  argued  between  ourselves,  but  as  the 
question  was  not  more  open  to  us  than  to  the  reader,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  bias  his  judg- 
ment. 

The  island  is  the  property  of  Lord  Bulkeley,  and  is  rented  from  him  at  a  small  sum 
by  some  poor  people,  whose  principal  harvest  is  the  Puffins,  which,  though  robbed  year 
after  year,  seem  to  make  their  annual  return  in  undiminished  numbers.  It  is  only  the  young 
birds  that  are  of  any  value,  and  these  are  prized  both  for  their  down  and  their  flesh,  though 
the  latter  requires  a  very  elaborate  expurgation  before  it  can  be  freed  from  its  rankness. 
After  the  bones  have  been  taken  out.  and  the  oil  carefully  expressed  from  them,  they  are 
steeped  in  vinegar  and  spices,  and  are  then  adjudged  to  be  eatable,  having  the  same  flavour, 
I  should  suppose,  which  any  thing  else  would  have  that  had  been  subjected  to  a  similar 
process.  They  were  set  before  us  at  Beaumaris  as  a  delicacy,  but  they  that  would  eat 
them  pickled  should  never  look  upon  them  alive.  We  were  informed  that  the  Puffins, 
Guillemots,  and  Razor-Bills  would  all  vanish  in  about  a  week  from  the  day  of  our  visit. 
The  Puffins  leave  many  of  their  young  behind  to  be  devoured  by  the  Peregrine  Falcons, 
which  breed  upon  the  opposite  promontory  of  Llandudno,  and  regularly  come  hither  to 
pick  up  the  leavings  when  the  parent  birds  have  departed.  They  do  not,  it  is  said,  take 
the  burrows  by  storm,  but  station  themselves  at  the  entrance  of  the  holes,  effectually  de- 
barring their  prey  from  any  possibility  of  escape ;  and  in  due  time  the  miserable  nestlings, 
pressed  by  hunger,  make  their  appearance,  and  fall  read)7  victims  to  their  watchful 
sentinels. 

When  my  friend  had  finished  his  sketch,  and  dotted  it  with  Puffins  till  he  was  tired, 
we  made  a  tour  round  the  island.  The  southern  coast  is  very  lofty,  and  covered  down  to 
the  water's  edge  with  grass  and  nettles,  reeds,  blackberry  bushes,  and  clumps  of  elder,  inter- 
spersed with  fragments  of  grey  lime-stone.  This  side  was  animated  by  Gulls  and  Terns, 
which  evinced  no  trust  in  us,  but  rose  like  a  cloud  into  the  air  on  the  first  sound  of  our 

approach. 


View  of  Puffin  Island,  near  Anglesea 


The  Bath,  built  by  Lord  Penryn,  near  Bangor,  N.  Wales 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  33 

approach.  Two  boys  of  our  boat's  crew  descended  with  the  art  and  alertness  of  monkies 
half  way  down  the  steep  cliff,  and  returned  each  with  a  young  Gull  muffled  up  in  his  bosom. 
These  were  valued  only  as  domestic  pets,  the  Gulls  being  considered  in  this  part  of  the 
world  as  too  rank  to  be  eaten,  though  I  imagine  that  they  would  prove  as  curable  as  the 
Puffins. 

The  northern  coast  of  the  island  being  exposed  to  a  greater  range  of  sea,  exhibits  a 
front  of  bare  rock,  black  and  rugged,  with  gloomy  caverns  at  the  base,  and  huge  overhang- 
ing masses  frowning  over  them.  On  the  ledges  of  the  rocks,  in  close  order,  and  tier  above 
tier,  stood  the  Guillemots  and  Razor-Bills,  their  white  breasts  exposed  and  appearing  in 
long  horizontal  stripes,  which  had  a  singular  effect  on  the  face  of  the  black  precipice.  We 
sometimes  heard  these  birds  called  apothecaries,  from  their  resemblance  when  on  their 
seats  to  the  ranges  of  jars  in  an  apothecary's  shop.  They  were  equally  numerous  on  the 
eastern  coast,  which  is  cut  out  into  a  square  recess,  the  three  sides  of  which  were  quite 
alive  with  them.  They  are  decided  to  be  as  little  palatable  as  the  Gulls,  but  their  eggs 
are  esteemed,  and  are  procured  with  great  difficulty  and  some  danger.  A  man  lowers 
himself  down  the  precipice  by  means  of  a  rope  made  fast  to  a  stake,  supporting  himself 
with  one  hand,  while  with  the  other  he  seizes  the  eggs  and  deposits  them  in  a  basket  slung 
to  his  back :  he  speedily  secures  all  the  spoil  that  is  within  his  reach,  and  by  placing  his 
feet  against  the  rocks  readily  enough  hauls  himself  up  again  to  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  but  he 
cannot  double  it  without  the  assistance  of  another  man,  and  this  is  the  most  perilous  act 
of  his  expedition.  The  people  employed  in  this  business  go  about  it  with  so  much  coolness 
and  confidence,  that  accidents  very  rarely  happen  ;  but  an  instance  once  occurred  on  the 
promontory  of  Holyhead  of  one  man's  overpowering  with  his  weight  another  who  was 
helping  him  up,  and  both  perished. 

It  was  almost  low  water  when  we  left  the  island,  and  there  was  a  tremendous  surf 
upon  the  Causeway,  but  we  were  in  the  way  of  only  the  last  and  least  tier  of  breakers,  and 
escaped  with  a  sprinkling.  We  returned  to  Beauinaris,  and  having  now  exhausted  all  the 
wonders  of  its  neighbourhood,  prepared  to  bid  farewell  to  Anglesey,  and  resume  our 
voyage  along  the  main  coast. 

We  walked  down  to  Garth  Ferry,  about  three  miles  south  of  Beaumaris,  over  a  beauti- 
ful road  on  the  face  of  a  steep  cliff  bounding  the  Menai,  with  bold  masses  of  rock  rising 
abruptly  to  our  right,  clothed  with  ivy  and  tangled  shrubs,  and  the  water  beneath  us  glittering 
through  the  branches  of  a  hanging  wood.  The  road  is  continued  to  Porth-aethwy,  but 
south  of  Garth  Ferry  the  cliff  is  bare  of  wood,  and  you  have  an  uninterrupted  view  of  all 
the  magnificent  scenery  of  the  bay.  This  has  been  called  one  of  the  finest  terraces  in  the 
world,  and  if  my  limited  observation  of  the  world  will  not  permit  me  to  indulge  in  so 
boundless  an  encomium,  I  am  very  ready  to  declare,  that  I  have  never  seen  it  excelled. 
The  approaches  to  Beaumaris,  from  the  south,  were  rugged  and  dangerous,  till  Lord 
Bulkeley  made  this  road,  which  is  certainly  a  very  honorable  monument  of  his  munifi- 
VOL.  ii.  r  cence 


34  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

cence  and  public  spirit.     It  was  a  work  of  great  labour  and  expense,  having  been  cut  in 
many  parts  of  its  length  through  the  solid  rock. 

Garth  Ferry  is  the  southern  limit  of  Beaumaris  Bay,  and  the  Menai,  at  this  point, 
becomes  suddenly  contracted  to  less  than  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  the  devastation  that  spread 
over  the  flat  and  defenceless  land  further  north  having  been  here  checked  by  a  firm  rocky 
bank.  We  crossed  over  here,  and  a  walk  of  about  half  a  mile  from  the  landing-place 
brought  us  to  the  neat  city  of  Bangor,  pleasantly  situated  in  a  narrow  green  valley, 
opening  into  Beaumaris  Bay.  The  town  is  small  and  irregular,  but  the  houses  are  very 
respectable,  and  being  all  washed  over  with  yellow  ochre  and  roofed  with  fine  blue  slates, 
have  an  appearance  of  peculiar  spruceness  and  cleanliness.  There  is  an  air  of  repose  and 
peacefulness  about  this  little  rural  city,  that  is  particularly  pleasing,  and  few  tourists  have 
entered  it  without  indulging  in  some  effusions  of  fine  sentiment ;  without  a  few  vain  mut- 
terings  about  restlessness  and  ambition,  and  a  few  as  vain  wishes  about  turning  their  backs 
upon  the  world,  putting  on  their  slippers,  and  here  subsiding  into  quiet  and  contentment. 
A  very  comfortable  inn,  abounding  in  all  the  good  things  of  this  life,  has  possibly  its  share 
in  the  inspiration  of  these  philosophical  fancies. 

The  bishop's  palace  does  not  break  in  upon  the  general  simplicity  of  the  place  by 
any  ambitious  magnificence,  but  participates  in  the  general  neatness  and  yellow  wash. 
The  cathedral  is  a  very  homely  one,  with  a  squat  tower,  which  was  checked  in  its  growth 
by  the  death  of  its  founder.  The  interior  is  spacious  and  well  proportioned  in  all  its  parts, 
but  plain  even  to  meanness,  and  barbarously  disfigured  by  an  universal  coat  of  white-wash. 
The  arches  of  the  nave  are  very  slightly  pointed,  without  mouldings  or  any  kind  of  decora- 
tion, and  spring  from  octangular  columns  of  great  size,  and  equally  unrelieved  by  sculp- 
ture. The  arches  leading  into  the  transepts  and  the  choir  are  more  pointed,  and  of  more 
elegant  construction.  There  are  no  monuments  to  attract  the  eye,  but  several  very  illus- 
trious personages  in  Welsh  history  here  lie  interred.  Gruffyth  ap  Cynan,  a  gallant  prince, 
after  a  reign  of  fifty  years,  was  buried  in  1137,  under  a  shrine  to  the  left  of  the  high  altar, 
but  there  is  no  trace  of  it  remaining.  Under  a  niche  in  the  south  transept  there  is  a  rude 
slab  of  stone,  with  a  flowery  cross  at  the  head,  which  is  said  to  be  the  monument  of  Owen 
Gwyneth,  the  son  of  the  before  named  prince,  who  emulated  all  the  valour  of  his  father. 

Owen  swift,  and  Owen  strong, 
Fairest  flower  of  Roderic's  stem, 
Gwyneth's  shield,  and  Britain's  gem. 
He  nor  heaps  his  brooded  stores, 
Nor  on  all  profusely  pours ; 
Lord  of  every  regal  art, 
Liberal  hand  and  open  heart. 

This  prince,  whose  noble  qualities  gained  him  no  friends  in  England,  was  excom- 
municated by  Archbishop  Becket,  for  marrying  his  first  cousin,  but  he  was  powerful  enough 

to 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  35 

to  despise  the  sentence,  and  continued  to  live  with  her  till  she  died.  His  contumacy,  how- 
ever, was  not  readily  forgotten,  and  though  he  was  too  dangerous  a  man  to  be  approached 
when  living,  an  opportunity  was  found  of  offering  him  a  safe  indignity  in  his  grave. 
When  Archbishop  Baldwin  appeared  at  Bangor,  to  preach  the  crusade,  he  cast  his 
eye  upon  the  tomb  of  Owen,  and  did  not  depart  without  laying  an  injunction  on  the 
bishop  of  the  see  to  remove  the  body  from  the  sanctuary,  whenever  he  could  do  it  with 
secrecy  and  security.  The  bishop,  in  obedience  to  this  holy  charge,  made  a  passage  from 
the  vault  through  the  south  wall  of  the  church,  under  ground,  and  thus  secretly  cast  the 
royal  corpse  into  the  church-yard.  Giraldus,  who  was  present  with  the  Archbishop,  and 
who  could  sometimes  do  little  things  to  please  great  people,  mentions  this  circumstance 
without  comment.  Whether  any  patriotic  hand  was  found  to  rescue  the  body  from  its  vile 
bed  is  not  recorded,  but  the  reader  will  not  forget  the  scene  which  Mr.  Southey  has  wrought 
out  of  this  incident;  the  appalling  appearance  of  his  hero,  Madoc,  before  the  priests  when 
at  their  midnight  sacrilege,  and  the  triumphant  manner  in  which  he  saves  the  relics  of  his 
father,  and  bears  them  with  him  to  America.  I  make  no  apology  for  quoting  the  following 
passage.  Madoc,  with  his  attendant,  has  just  stolen  into  the  church  to  see  what  was 
going  on. 

Beside  the  grave 

Stood  Baldwin  and  the  Prior,  who,  albeit 
Cambrian  himself,  in  fear  and  awe  obeyed 
The  lordly  Primate's  will. — They  stood  and  watch'd 
The  ministers  perform  the  irreverent  work. 
And  now  with  spade  and  mattock  have  they  broken 
Into  the  house  of  death,  and  now  have  they 
From  the  stone  coffin  wrench'd  the  iron  cramps, 
When  sudden  interruption  startled  them, 
And,  clad  in  complete  mail  from  head  to  foot, 
They  saw  the  Prince  come  on.     Their  tapers  gleani'd 
Upon  his  visage,  as  he  wore  his  helm 
Open  ;  and  when  in  that  pale  countenance, — 
For  the  strong  feeling  blanch'd  his  cheek, — they  saw 
His  father's  living  lineaments,  a  fear 
Like  ague  shook  them.     But  anon  that  fit 
Of  scar'd  imagination  to  the  sense 

Of  other  peril  yielded,  when  they  heard  » 

Prince  Madoc's  dreadful  voice.     Stay!  he  exclaim'd, 
For  now  they  would  have  fled  ; — stir  not  a  man, — 
Or  if  I  once  put  breath  into  this  horn, 
All  Wales  will  hear,  as  if  dead  Owen  call'd 
For  vengeance  from  that  grave.     Stir  not  a  man, 
Or  not  a  man  shall  live !  The  doors  are  watch'd, 
And  ye  are  at  my  mercy  ! 

The  cathedral  is  dedicated  to  St.  Daniell,  son  of  Dinawd,  abbot  of  the  famous  mo- 
nastery of  Bangor  ys  Coed,  in  Flintshire.    Daniell  founded  a  college  here  for  the  instruction 

F  2  of 


36  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  youth,  which  was  converted  into  a  bishoprick  by  Maelgwyn  Gwyneth,  who  made  the 
saint  the  first  bishop.  The  cathedral  was  exposed  to  various  revolutions  during  the  Welsh 
wars,  and  was  twice  entirely  destroyed,  and  finally  rebuilt,  as  it  now  appears,  by  Bishop 
SkerHngton,  in  the  year  1532. 

Leaving  Bangor,  we  proceeded  along  the  eastern  coast  of  Beaumaris  Bay.  About 
half  a  mile  from  the  town  is  Aber  Cegin,  or  Port  Penrhyn,  a  grand  emporium  of  slates 
procured  from  the  quarries  of  Lady  Penrhyn.  A  fine  quay,  projecting  several  hundred 
yards  into  the  strait,  was  built  here  by  the  late  Lord  Penrhyn,  on  each  side  of  which 
vessels  of  three  hundred  tons  may  lie  and  receive  their  lading.  The  slates  are  exported 
in  immense  quantities  to  Liverpool,  Bristol,  Dublin,  and  indeed  to  all  parts  of  the  king- 
dom. They  are  of  an  extremely  fine  texture,  and  are  made  of  various  sizes,  from  thick 
slabs  for  tombstones  and  pavements,  to  the  thinnest  plates  used  for  roofing.  There  is  also 
a  very  extensive  manufacture  of  cyphering-slates  established  here,  which  the  Welsh  have 
advanced  to  such  a  degree  of  perfection,  that  they  have  altogether  eclipsed  and  reduced 
to  bankruptcy  the  more  bungling  manufacturers  of  Switzerland,  to  whom  we  were  formerly 
indebted  for  our  principal  supplies  of  these  useful  articles.  The  superiority  of  the  Welsh 
slates  consists  in  their  having  an  equal  smoothness  and  polish  on  both  sides,  whereas  those 
of  the  Swiss  artists  had  always  one  side  rough  and  ill-finished.  The  processes  by  which 
they  are  prepared  are  extremely  simple :  they  are  first  scraped  with  a  steel  scraper,  then 
rubbed  with  a  hard  stone  till  an  even  surface  is  produced,  and  receive  their  last  polish  by 
further  friction  with  fine  slate  powder  mixed  up  with  water  into  a  paste.  Four  hundred 
dozen  of  them  are  made  here  and  exported  every  week.  The  whole  quantity  of  manufac- 
tured slates  exported  was,  for  many  years,  one  hundred  tons  per  day,  but  this  amount  we 
were  told  had  been  very  materially  reduced  by  the  high  price  of  timber,  and  the  con- 
sequent decline  of  building,  occasioned  by  the  American  war.  The  quarries  are  about 
four  miles  distant  from  the  port  at  Dolawen,  from  whence  the  slates  are  brought  down  with 
great  facility  and  rapidity  in  waggons,  which  run  upon  iron  rail-roads,  three  horses  being 
able  to  draw  twenty  tons. 

There  is  a  small  inn  close  to  the  port,  which  particularly  attracted  our  attention,  not 
from  its  promise  of  entertainment,  but  from  the  peculiar  neatness  and  elegance  of  its  whole 
form  and  finishing.  It  was  designed  by  the  late  Mr.  Wyatt,  who  has  shewn  his  taste  not 
more  in  the  construction  of  the  building,  than  the  choice  of  its  situation,  which  commands 
on  one  side,  through  a  broad  opening,  a  magnificent  view  of  the  mountains,  and  on  another 
looks  over  all  the  varied  scenery  of  the  bay.  Lord  Penrhyn  was  a  most  princely  bene- 
factor to  this  part  of  the  country,  which,  before  it  was  tamed  by  his  improvements,  was  a 
rugged  waste,  without  roads,  thinly  peopled,  and  the  few  inhabitants  in  a  melancholy  con- 
dition ;  the  common  labourers  ill  fed  and  wretchedly  housed,  and  the  farmers  so  poor, 
says  Mr.  Pennant,  that  in  all  the  tract  they  could  not  muster  more  than  three  miserable 
teams.  His  Lordship  first  opened  his  quarries  in  1782,  and  in  a  few  years  they  gave  em- 
ployment 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  37 

ployment  to  six  hundred  people :  new  and  comfortable  habitations  were  provided  for  the 
labourers  ;  good  roads  were  formed  over  ground  before  impassable,  and  the  whole  country 
gradually  assumed  a  new  aspect,  and  is  now  enlivened  by  all  the  cheerful  signs  of  pros- 
perous industry.  We  had  the  pleasure,  on  a  former  occasion,  of  travelling  through  the 
whole  of  this  newly  civilized  district,  and  can  bear  witness  to  its  thriving  condition. 

At  a  short  distance  from  the  port  is  Lady  Penrh3rn's  Bath,  an  elegant  little  building, 
designed  by  Wyatt,  and  constructed  at  an  immense  expense.  It  stands  at  the  extremity 
of  a  road,  carried  out  about  two  hundred  and  twenty  yards  into  the  strait,  raised  nearly 
thirty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  water,  and  terminating  in  a  circle,  large  enough  to  per- 
mit a  carriage  to  turn  round.  The  bath  has  much  the  character  of  an  Italian  building, 
and  has  a  very  happy  effect  on  the  border  of  this  charming  bay.  We  paused  here  for 
some  time,  quite  delighted  with  the  boldness  and  beauty  of  the  scenery  expanded  round 
us.  Seen  from  hence  the  mountains  round  to  Penmaen  Mawr,  Carnedd  Llewelyn  among 
them,  second  only  to  Snowdon,  were  ranged  in  a  grand  crescent,  inclosing  a  plain  of  ex- 
treme fertility,  and  glowing  with  the  ripened  harvest.  It  was  now  low  water,  and  we 
could  but  just  perceive  the  sea  in  a  white  streak,  bordering  the  opposite  shore.  To  the 
north  was  a  long  extended  plain  of  sand,  at  the  extremity  of  which  the  huge  discon- 
nected rock  of  Llancludno  towered  with  uncommon  majesty.  The  shores  of  Anglesey 
composed  a  more  tame  but  a  pleasing  picture,  in  which  the  little  town  of  Beaumaris  ap- 
parently growing  out  of  the  water,  and  Baron  Hill  with  its  dark  grove  rising  behind  it, 
were  the  features  that  most  courted  the  eye. 

We  proceeded  from  hence  to  look  at  the  grounds  of  Lady  Penrhyn,  which  are  very 
inferior  to  those  of  Baron  Hill,  in  the  important  furniture  of  wood.  They  were  formerly 
dignified  with  a  grove  of  venerable  oaks,  but  these  have  given  way  to  upstarts  of  yesterday, 
principally  firs.  The  great  entrance  into  the  park  is  through  a  splendid  gate-way,  re- 
sembling a  triumphal  arch,  intrinsically  very  handsome,  but,  perhaps,  rather  too  heroic 
and  ambitious  a  fabric  for  these  peaceful  shores.  The  mansion  occupies  the  site,  and 
retains,  I  believe,  a  great  part  of  the  substance  of  an  ancient  castle,  long  the  residence  of 
the  Welsh  princes,  but  it  has  been  much  enlarged  and  embellished  by  Wyatt,  still  retaining 
the  character  of  a  castle,  though  in  a  court  dress.  It  is  altogether  a  very  handsome  build- 
ing, and  stands  in  a  situation  commanding  an  advantageous  view  of  all  the  grand  scenery 
of  this  romantic  country.  Every  part  of  the  establishment  bespeaks  the  consequence  of 
rank  and  wealth.  At  a  short  distance  from  the  house  is  a  gothic  chapel  of  elegant  design, 
with  a  brilliant  window  of  painted  glass.  The  pulpit  is  of  cedar-wood,  and  on  the  pannels 
are  some  well  executed  figures  in  bass  relief,  representing  subjects  from  the  scriptures. 
This  building  is  of  some  antiquity,  and  formerly  stood  nearer  to  the  house,  but  was  pulled 
down  and  rebuilt  in  its  present  place,  on  the  same  plan  and  with  the  same  materials. 

The  stables  are  celebrated  in  this  country  for  their  magnificence,  and  the  complete- 
ness of  their  accommodations.     They  are  fronted  with  blue  slate,  and,  indeed,  are  built 

almost 


38  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

almost  entirely,  inside  and  outside,  walls,  stalls,  and  mangers,  with  the  same  material, 
which  is  applied  to  all  manner  of  uses  in  this  demesne.  The  bath  is  built  with  it,  but 
washed  over  with  yellow  ochre;  and  all  the  fences  of  the  park  are  composed  of  it,  cut  into 
the  shape  of  palisades,  which  are  fastened  with  pins  to  a  wooden  railing,  and  have  a  very 
neat  appearance. 

Continuing  our  walk  along  the  shore,  we  soon  came  to  the  Ogwen,  a  shallow  rapid 
river  which  springs  from  a  pool  in  the  mountains,  very  famous  for  its  trout.  A  man,  who 
had  for  some  time  had  his  eye  upon  us,  prophetic  of  a  job,  here  interposed,  while  we  were 
hesitating  between  the  tasks  of  pulling  off  our  shoes  and  stockings,  and  walking  a  mile 
higher  up  to  the  bridge,  and  carried  us  over  the  stream.  This  victory  gained,  we  followed 
the  shore  for  two  or  three  miles  further,  and  then  turned  inland,  and  proceeded  through 
rich  meadows  and  corn  fields,  to  the  village  of  Aber,  situated  at  the  entrance  of  a  deep, 
wild  glen,  watered  by  a  small  river.  At  the  extremity  of  this  glen  there  is  a  waterfall, 
called  Rhaiadr  Mawr,  The  Great  Cataract,  and  if  the  name  does  not  very  exactly  describe 
the  object,  and  should  tempt  the  traveller  to  the  spot  under  false  expectations,  he  will  see 
enough  by  the  way  to  atone  for  his  disappointment.  We  immediately  hastened  forward 
to  see  it,  and  had  not  penetrated  far  before  we  stopped  to  contemplate,  with  admiration, 
a  scene  of  the  most  romantic  character.  To  our  right  the  glen  was  bounded  by  Frith 
ddu,  a  mountain  of  immense  bulk,  with  a  heavy,  rounded  summit,  and  a  precipitous  front 
covered  with  a  smooth,  green  turf.  Maes  y  Gaer  formed  the  boundary  to  our  left,  a 
mountain  of  equal  height,  but  of  a  more  varied,  broken,  and  picturesque  figure,  and 
darkened  up  to  its  summit  with  coppice  wood  clustering  wildly  round  masses  of  rock.  At 
its  base  were  a  few  weather-worn  cottages,  just  of  such  forms  and  in  such  places  as  an 
artist  would  wish  them,  and  beneath  them,  in  the  centre  of  the  glen,  was  the  stream,  flash- 
ing over  a  rocky  bed,  rapid  and  melodious,  and  crossed  a  few  yards  from  us  by  a  one- 
arched  bridge.  In  the  back  ground,  soaring  far  above  Maes  y  Gaer,  appeared  the  summit 
of  Llwt  Mawr,  strangely  notched  and  shivered,  and  capped  with  a  thin  cloud. 

After  advancing  about  half  a  mile,  catching  the  same  objects  in  ever-changing  points 
of  view  from  the  windings  of  the  glen,  we  turned  a  point,  and  had  it  before  us  to  its  ex- 
tremity, in  one  reach,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  length.  The  barrier  to  our  right  still 
preserved  the  same  heaviness  and  uniformity  of  outline,  but  to  the  left  the  mountains  were 
tumbled  about  in  the  wildest  disorder,  bounded  to  our  view  by  Foel  ddiarth,  a  dark  and 
horrid  mountain,  spiring  up  in  two  tremendous  peaks.  Llwt  Mawr  now  appeared  in 
front,  and  blocked  up  the  avenue  with  a  precipice  of  black  rock,  over  which  tumbled 
the  torrent,  forming  a  long  streak  of  a  snowy  whiteness.  A  little  to  the  right  of  it,  and  at 
a  higher  elevation,  we  perceived  a  few  more  spots  of  foam  on  the  face  of  the  rock,  and  if 
we  had  had  the  regulation  of  the  mountain  vocabulary,  we  should  have  had  these  in  con- 
templation when  we  called  the  other  Rhaiadr  Mawr,  but  we  had  an  interpreter  with  us  who 
would  not  have  it  so,  and  insisted  that  it  was  all  the  Great  Cataract. 

As 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  39 

As  we  proceeded,  the  glen  became  narrower,  the  mountains  almost  meeting  at  their 
bases,  and  shrouding  us  in  a  deeper  gloom  and  solitude,  the  silence  of  which  was  broken 
only  by  the  equal,  constant  murmuring  of  the  river.  We  soon  heard  the  sound  of  a  rapid 
torrent  which  came  breaking  and  roaring  down  the  mountains  to  our  left,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  afterwards  we  could  distinguish  the  dashing  of  the  fall.  I  have  already  intimated 
that  this  does  not  precisely  deserve  its  name,  but,  if  it  be  not  magnificent,  it  exhibits  a 
very  pleasing  spectacle,  set  off  by  a  very  grand  combination  of  accompanying  scenery. 
The  torrent  precipitates  itself  in  two  falls,  the  highest  of  which  is  very  insignificant  from 
every  point  of  view  from  whence  we  could  see  it.  The  other  is,  I  imagine,  at  least  seventy 
feet  perpendicular:  the  stream  is  about  four  yards  wide,  and,  being  shallow  and  frothed 
in  its  passage  over  rough  rocks  before  it  arrives  at  the  verge  of  the  lower  precipice,  falls 
in  its  whole  length  in  a  sheet  of  foam.  The  face  of  the  precipice  and  the  broken  rocks 
below  it  are  perfectly  black,  and  are  finely  contrasted  with  the  cascade,  and  the  hoary 
mist  in  which  it  rises  on  its  rebound.  When  swollen  with  the  winter  rains,  the  fall,  of 
course,  would  have  more  dignity,  but  we  saw  it  under  as  flattering  circumstances  as  can 
often  occur  in  the  summer  season,  for  there  had  very  lately  been  three  successive  days  of 
rain,  and  a  soaking  shower  was  falling  while  we  were  on  the  spot. 

On  our  return  the  rain  increased,  accompanied  by  a  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning, 
which  drove  us  for  shelter  into  a  shepherd's  hut,  standing  in  a  most  rude  and  lonely  situa- 
tion about  midway  up  the  glen.  An  abode  so  squalid  and  miserable  we  had  never  en- 
tered before,  a  bold  assertion  to  make,  after  having  acknowledged  that  AVC  passed  a  night 
at  Aberdaron.  The  hut  was  constructed  with  loose  stones,  very  uncouthly  piled  together, 
and  covered  with  a  thatched  roof,  black  and  rotten,  and  full  of  hollows  and  holes.  It  con- 
tained but  one  low  room,  crammed  full  of  indescribable  furniture,  huddled  together  in  in- 
describable confusion,  and  among  the  mass  were  two  loathsome  beds,  to  be  divided  be- 
tween a  family  of  seven  people.  The  floor  was  the  bare  earth,  and  its  natural  privilege 
of  never  being  washed  had,  very  evidently,  and  from  a  remote  period,  been  extended  to 
every  part  of  the  room,  and  every  part  of  its  furniture.  The  mother  of  the  family,  ragged 
and  bare-footed,  was  toasting  or  rather  smoking  oat-cakes  over  a  fern  fire,  and  her  daugh- 
ter, a  pretty,  black-eyed,  rough-headed,  wild-looking  girl,  was  vehemently,  but  vainly 
struggling  to  check  the  sports  of  two  younger  children,  who  were  amusing  themselves  with 
alternately  running  into  the  rain,  and  rolling  upon  the  beds.  The  father,  with  his  boys, 
was  tending  the  cattle  upon  the  mountains.  A  woman  (for  woman  is  the  responsible 
person  in  these  matters),  with  any  love  of  cleanliness,  and  any  sense  of  the  comfortable, 
might,  with  no  better  means,  have  made  a  much  more  cheerful  cottage  than  the  mistress 
of  this  filthy  den;  but  there  was  a  great  deal  of  wretchedness  springing  from  a  hopeless  and 
humbling  poverty,  which,  though  five  of  the  family  lent  their  hands  to  the  work,  they 
could  not  relieve.  There  is  much  of  this  wretchedness  in  the  village  of  Aber,  which  struck  us 
the  more  forcibly,  as  we  had  generally  seen  the  people  in  this  part  of  the  country  in  decent 

circumstances. 


40  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

circumstances.  At  Beaumaris  the  poor  are  all  comfortably  lodged  and  clothed,  but  here, 
at  the  distance  of  half  a  dozen  miles,  they  are,  in  every  respect,  most  miserably  provided 
for,  and  yet  both  places  are  on  the  estate  of  the  same  nobleman,  Lord  Bulkeley. 

The  storm  soon  subsided,  and  we  had  a  delightful  walk  back  to  the  village,  the  glen 
opening  before  us  into  the  sea.  At  its  entrance  on  the  western  side  of  the  river,  there  is  a 
small  artificial  mount,  on  which  formerly  stood  the  palace  of  Llewellyn  ap  Jorworth,  Prince 
of  North  Wales,  and  a  more  noble  situation  for  a  palace  can  scarcely  be  conceived.  There 
is  not  a  single  stone  to  be  seen  on  the  mount,  but,  a  few  yards  distant  from  it,  there  are 
some  slight  remains  of  a  wall,  which  my  guide,  the  village-clerk  and  cobbler,  informed  me, 
might,  within  his  memory,  be  traced  for  an  extent  of  nine  yards.  This  detached  building 
is  supposed  to  have  been  the  kitchen  of  the  palace.  While  I  was  poring  over  these  frag- 
ments, my  guide  suddenly  left  me,  but  speedily  returned,  in  company  with  a  very  old 
man,  who  sat  himself  down  at  the  foot  of  the  mount,  and  related  to  me  a  tragical  story, 
authenticated  in  its  main  facts  by  history,  but  more  circumstantially  preserved  by  the 
tradition  of  the  village.  Llewellyn  in  his  wars  with  Henry  the  Third  had  the  fortune  to 
take  prisoner  William  de  Bruse,  a  powerful  baron,  and  a  man  of  very  insinuating  address, 
and  great  personal  beauty.  The  prince,  conciliated  by  his  manners,  treated  him  with 
kindness  and  courtesy,  and,  on  the  receipt  of  a  proper  ransom,  restored  him  to  liberty; 
but,  soon  after  his  departure,  having  reason  to  suspect,  from  the  conduct  of  his  princess 
Joan,  that  she  had  been  somewhat  too  intimate  with  his  handsome  and  accomplished 
guest,  he  determined  to  get  him  again  into  his  power.  For  this  purpose  he  sent  him 
a  friendly  invitation  to  his  palace,  which  De  Bruse  thoughtlessly  accepted,  nor  had  any 
suspicion  of  treachery  till  the  prince's  guards  suddenly  seized  upon  him  at  the  conclusion 
of  a  splendid  banquet,  dragged  him  from  the  room,  and,  without  further  ceremony  or  ex- 
planation, hung  him  on  a  tree.  This  done,  Llewellyn,  to  convince  himself  that  he  had 
made  no  mistake,  as  well  as  to  give  pungency  to  his  revenge,  despatched  the  harper  of 
the  palace  to  the  princess,  with  orders  either  to  say  or  sing  to  her  words  to  this  effect, — 
*  Say,  wife  of  Llewellyn,  what  would  you  give  to  see  your  William?' — The  princess  re- 
plied— '  Wales,  England,  and  Llewellyn,  I  would  give  them  all  to  see  my  William/ — and, 
on  this  explicit  declaration,  the  harper  pointed  out  to  her  her  lover  in  the  hopeless  state 
that  I  have  described. 

The  old  man  now  led  me  to  the  exact  place  where  De  Bruse  suffered,  which  is' 
called  Wern-grogedig,  The  Tree  of  Execution.  The  tradition  has  outlived  the  tree,  but 
I  was  careful  to  note  that  the  spot  may  be  seen  very  distinctly  from  the  mount.  It  should 
appear  that  the  prince,  after  sacrificing  his  rival,  became  appeased,  and  pardoned  the 
princess,  for,  on  her  death,  lie  raised  a  monastery  over  her  grave  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to 
her  memory.  Possibly  he  may  have  discovered  that  she  had  not  been  quite  so  criminal 
as  he  supposed  her  to  have  been,  or  his  testimonies  of  respect  may  have  had  some  re- 
ference to  her  powerful  relatives  of  England.  He  had  reason,  however,  to  remember  her 

with 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  41 

with  some  real  gratitude,  for  she  had  once  proved  a  most  serviceable  friend  to  him  in  an 
hour  of  desperate  need.  In  the  year  1212,  King  John,  with  an  overwhelming  army, 
joined  by  the  rulers  of  South  Wales  and  Powys,  invaded  North  Wales,  and  pressed  so  hardly 
upon  Llewelyn,  that,  at  length,  finding  he  had  no  hopes  but  in  negociation,  he  sent  his 
princess  to  treat  for  him,  and  she  '  being  a  discreet  woman,'  had  art  enough  to  check  her 
father  in  his  course  of  victory,  and  concluded  a  peace  for  her  husband  *. 

We  found  a  very  comfortable  little  inn  at  Aber,  which  induced  us  to  halt  there  for 
the  night,  and  on  the  following  morning  we  started  for  Conway.  A  fine  level  road  leads 
for  several  miles  from  the  village,  through  a  delightful  plain,  bounded  by  Penmaen  Mawr, 
which  now  became  the  grand  object  of  our  attention.  On  arriving  at  its  base,  I  deter- 
mined, while  my  friend  proceeded  to  Conway,  to  ascend  to  its  summit,  in  the  hope  of  a 
prospect.  An  unpromising  mist  was  before  my  eyes  while  my  resolution  was  adopted, 
but,  as  this  was  the  last  mountain  of  Alpine  dignity  that  I  was  to  encounter  in  Wales,  I 
was  disposed  to  make  the  best  of  my  opportunity,  such  as  it  was.  I  ascended  on  the 
southern  side,  which  is  the  least  precipitous,  but  very  steep,  and  covered  for  a  long  way 
up  with  a  grassy  turf,  sprinkled  with  brambles  and  stunted  shrubs,  and  plentifully  strewed 
with  stones.  This  green  slope  forms  a  broad  basement,  out  of  which  grows  a  stupendous 
mass  of  rock,  diminishing  towards  the  summit,  which  is  five  hundred  and  fifteen  yards 
above  the  level  of  the  sea.  This  second  stage  of  the  mountain,  which  is  horribly  rugged, 
and  in  many  parts  perpendicular,  is  called  Braich  y  Ddinas,  The  Arm  of  the  City,  and 
was  the  site  of  an  early  British  fortification,  of  which  there  are  still  large  remains. 

After  a  resolute  tug,  which  advanced  me  to  a  great  elevation,  I  turned  round,  and 
was  gratified  with  a  prospect  that  would  have  amply  repaid  the  labour  of  a  much  more 
difficult  expedition.  To  my  right  was  the  blue  expanse  of  boundless  sea,  and  in  front  the 
yellow  sands,  divided  by  a  thousand  winding  streaks  of  water,  and  bordered  by  a  lovely 
plain,  spread  out  beneath  my  eye,  and  covered  with  corn  and  pasture,  and  tufted  with 
wood, — a  long  stripe  of  meadow  land  of  a  brilliant  green  edging  the  sands,  and  the  remain- 
ing surface  adorned  with  a  warm  and  blended  colouring,  that  reminded  me  of  the  rich 
border  of  an  Indian  shawl.  More  directly  under  me  lay  a  village,  with  a  church,  seated 
at  the  entrance  of  a  pretty  valley,  hemmed  in  by  the  savage  mountains,  which,  extending 
before  me  in  a  long  range,  formed,  also,  in  its  whole  length,  the  sudden  boundary  of  the 
beautiful  plain.  The  mountains  inclosing  the  glen  of  Aber  appeared  drawn  round  in  a 
complete  circle,  the  black  and  shivered  summit  of  Llwt-mawr  soaring  above  them  all. 
I  could  distinguish  the  white  foam  of  the  waterfall,  but  it  was  too  diminutive  to  have  any 
effect  in  the  great  scene  which  my  eye  now  commanded. 

Continuing  my  ascent,  I  soon  arrived  at  the  verge  of  Braich  y  Ddinas,  and  was  pre- 
sently enveloped  by  a  grey,  close  mist,  which  rendered  every  object  invisible  but  the  rock 

*  Powel,  p.  191. 
VOL.  11.  G  on 


42  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

on  which  I  stood.  All  traces  of  vegetation  now  disappeared,  my  patli  became  exceed- 
ingly steep,  and  was  entirely  covered  with  loose  stones,  all  in  sharp-edged,  angular  frag- 
ments, over  which,  with  some  difficulty,  and  two  or  three  falls,  I  made  my  way  to  the 
summit.  I  had  a  guide  with  me,  but  he  was  not  well  acquainted  with  the  marks,  and, 
confused  by  the  mist,  twice  missed  the  track,  protesting  the  whole  time  that  he  could  find 
his  way  up  blindfold.  The  summit  shoots  up  in  two  protuberances  of  not  quite  equal 
height,  on  both  of  which  are  the  remains  of  some  rude  works.  On  the  lower  one  there  is 
a  circular  enclosure  about  twelve  feet  in  diameter,  with  a  wall  round  it,  built  of  loose  un- 
hewn stone,  somewhat  less  than  four  feet  high,  and  about  three  feet  thick.  Around 
this  are  several  smaller  circles,  but  their  walls  are  overthrown,  and  lie  in  confused  heaps. 
Near  these  remains  there  is  a  small  well  in  the  rock,  which  was  now  full  of  water,  and 
which  has  never  been  seen  empty  in  the  driest  seasons.  On  the  higher  peak  there  is  an 
immense  heap  of  stones,  which  I  should  have  ventured  to  have  called  a  carne,  had  not  the 
spot  been  subject  to  the  examination  of  more  scientific  inquirers  than  myself,  who  have 
never  mentioned  such  an  object.  It  seemed  to  me  to  be  precisely  like  that  which  I  had 
seen  on  the  promontory  of  Holyhead,  and  was  hollowed  in  the  same  manner  at  the  top  as 
if  it  had  been  opened. 

While  I  was  pondering  over  these  matters,  the  mist  suddenly  parted  before  me,  and 
through  a  small  opening  gave  me  a  glimpse  of  the  sea,  and  a  green  valley,  sunk  to  a  vast 
depth  below  me.  There  was  something  inexpressibly  beautiful  in  this  sudden  creation,  but 
the  first  exclamation  of  delight  had  scarcely  passed  my  lips  before  the  mist  again  col- 
lapsed, and  all  was  blank.  In  a  minute  it  opened  again  in  various  places,  discovering  a 
perplexing  view  of  sky  and  sea  and  land,  in  spots  and  fragments,  when  it  closed  again, 
and  again  opened ;  and  thus,  for  several  minutes,  a  succession  of  these  strange  and  transi- 
tory scenes  played  before  me,  as  rapid  as  the  changes  of  a  magic  lantern.  Once  or 
twice  the  opening  spread  broad  enough  to  give  me  an  unbroken  and  general  pro- 
spect, but  it  was  a  prospect  of  a  moment,  and,  at  length,  a  dark  cloud  of  great  volume 
and  density,  which  I  had  seen  at  some  distance  to  my  left,  advanced  and  settled  round 
me,  involving  me  in  deeper  obscurity  than  ever.  I  now  could  not  see  two  yards  before 
me,  and,  as  1  groped  about,  it  seemed  as  if  every  step  that  I  took  led  me  to  the  brink  of 
a  bottomless  precipice.  My  guide  pronounced  this  darkness  to  be  quite  hopeless,  but 
suspecting  him  of  selfish  motives,  I  sat  down  upon  the  rock,  determined  not  to  give  up 
the  day  without  a  patient  trial.  The  situation  struck  me  as  very  awful:  I  could  see 
nothing  but  a  few  naked  crags,  and  such  was  the  gloom,  and  the  utter  stillness,  that  it 
was  like  being  out  of  the  world,  and  affected  the  mind  with  a  sense  of  horrid  loneliness. 

I  sat  here  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  had  become  chilled  with  the  damp,  and  was 
growing  very  heartless,  when  I  perceived  a  spot  of  blue  sky  to  my  left,  which  rapidly  en- 
larged, and  soon  the  whole  body  of  the  cloud  appeared  in  motion,  and  floated  majes- 
tically away,  disclosing  sky  and  sea,  and  field  after  field,  and  hill  after  hill,  till  the  whole 

prospect 


Penman-maur,  taken  from  near  Aber,  N.  Wales 


View  of  Conway  Castle,  Caernarvonshire 


VOVAGF.    UOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  43 

prospect  was  clear  and  expanded  before  me.  My  view  was  now  of  great  extent,  beauty, 
and  variety.  The  atmosphere  was  most  clear  to  the  west  and  north,  and  I  could  see 
distinctly  over  all  Anglesey  and  a  sublime  expanse  of  sea.  The  distance  to  the  east  was 
cloudy,  but  the  view  from  the  spot  where  I  stood,  over  a  rich  hollow  almost  immediately 
under  me,  the  crags  of  Sychnant,  the  Conway,  and  the  hills  of  Denbighshire,  was  ex- 
ceedingly bold  and  beautiful.  Very  far  to  the  north-east  I  could  perceive  some  misty 
forms  of  hills  which  I  imagined  to  be  the  fells  of  Lancashire.  The  mountains  to  the  south 
were  not  free  from  mist,  and  I  was  not  high  enough  to  see  any  greater  length  or  breadth 
of  the  chain  than  I  had  seen  from  a  much  lower  elevation. 

I  was  now  gratified  with  all  that  I  had  hoped  for  when  I  began  to  ascend  the  moun- 
tain, and  I  should  have  departed  dissatisfied  had  this  ultimate  and  full  disclosure  been 
wanting  to  my  entertainment;  but  it  was  certainly  less  interesting  than  the  partial  and  va- 
rying breaks  and  glimmerings  by  which  it  was  preceded,  not  only  from  the  fanciful  aspects 
under  which  the  objects  were  exhibited,  but  from  the  lively  expectation  kept  up  in  the 
mind  of  something  still  to  come.  The  wild  and  rapid  eddying  of  the  mist  was  almost  as 
amusing  as  the  capricious  spectacle  which  it  kept  shewing  and  shifting  before  me,  and  the 
sailing  away  of  the  dark  cloud,  which  moved  off  horizontally,  unveiling  the  country  as  it 
passed,  was  the  finest  sight  that  I  ever  beheld. 

Penmaen  Mawr,  itself,  when  perfectly  unfolded,  became  an  interesting  object,  both 
from  the  savage  grandeur  of  its  natural  forms,  and  the  rude  monuments  of  ancient  art  which 
are  scattered  about  it.  The  mountain  bears  a  very  ruinous  aspect,  not  from  the  impres- 
sion of  any  great  convulsion,  but  the  effects  of  slow  demolition.  Braich  y  Ddinas  is 
almost  entirely  covered  with  an  irregular  bed  of  loose  stones,  in  places  three  and  four  feet 
thick,  and,  where  the  rock  rises  up  perpendicularly,  it  shews  on  its  hacked  and  shattered 
surface  the  waste  that  it  has  suffered.  The  fortification  in  its  present  state  is  scarcely 
susceptible  of  exact  and  certain  description.  At  a  considerable  depth  below  the  summit 
there  appears  to  have  been  two  great  dry  Avails,  rising  one  above  the  other,  but  they  are 
so  confounded  with  the  heaps  of  stones  that  have  streamed  from  the  rock  above  them, 
that  I  could  not,  with  that  allowance  of  attention  and  time  which  I  thought  it  worth  while 
to  bestow  upon  them,  ascertain  their  figure  and  limits.  Within  both  the  spaces  which 
they  inclose  are  numerous  circular  walls,  like  those  already  described  on  the  summit,  of 
various  dimensions,  many  twelve  feet  in  diameter,  some  eighteen,  and  many  only  five.  In 
some  of  these  the  inclosures  are  cut  in  half  by  an  inner  wall,  and  in  others  divided  by 
two  intersecting  walls  into  four  compartments.  The  outer  Avails  of  them  all  are  in  ruins, 
and  in  many  instances  raised  but  little  above  the  surface  of  the  bed  of  stones  by  Avhich 
they  are  surrounded,  but  their  circularity  is  distinctly  marked  out  by  the  inner  spaces, 
Avhich  have  been  protected  from  the  encroachment  of  the  debris.  Some  of  these  Avere 
covered  Avith  a  bright  green  turf,  and  had  the  appearance  of  gems  incased  in  the  rock. 
My  guide  called  them  all  toAvers,  and  so,  indeed,  they  have  often  been  called  before,  and 

G  2  decided 


44  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

decided  to  have  been  the  habitations  of  the  soldiers,  but,  in  spite  of  this  explanation,  I 
could  not  exactly  make  up  my  mind  about  their  meaning  and  use.  Whether  they  were 
ever  high  enough  to  deserve  the  name  of  towers  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain,  the  stones  with 
which  they  were  constructed  being  so  mixed  with  others  which  made  no  part  of  them ; 
and  I  hesitated  in  admitting  them  to  be  habitations,  from  the  exceeding  diminutiveness 
of  some  of  the  inclosures,  for,  in  those  which  were  divided  into  several  compartments,  and 
in  those  which  were  only  five  feet  in  diameter,  a  man  could  not  lie  down  at  his  length.  I 
observed  no  aperture  in  any  one  of  them  for  an  entrance,  and  there  are  no  means  of  de- 
termining whether  they  were  ever  roofed. 

This  fortification  is  thus  described  in  Gibson's  Camden,  from  some  notes  of  Sir  John 
Wynn  of  Gwedir.  "  On  the  top  of  Penmaen  stands  a  lofty  and  impregnable  hill,  called 
Braich  y  Dinas,  where  we  find  the  ruinous  walls  of  an  exceeding  strong  fortification,  en- 
compassed with  a  treble  wall,  and  within  each  wall  the  foundation  of  at  least  a  hundred 
towers,  all  round,  and  of  equal  bigness,  and  about  six  yards  diameter  within  the  walls. 
The  walls  of  this  Dinas  were,  in  most  places,  two  yards  thick,  and  in  some  about  three. 
This  castle  seems,  while  it  stood,  to  have  been  impregnable,  there  being  no  way  to  offer 
any  assault  to  it;  the  hill  being  so  very  high,  steep,  and  rocky,  and  the  walls  of  such 
strength.  The  way  or  entrance  into  it  ascends  with  many  twinings,  so  that  a  hundred 
men  could  defend  themselves  against  a  whole  legion,  and  yet  it  should  seem  that  there 
were  lodgings  for  20,000  men.  By  the  tradition  of  our  ancestors,  this  was  the  strongest 
and  safest  refuge  or  place  of  defence  that  the  ancient  Britons  had  in  all  Snowdon  to  se- 
cure them  from  the  incursions  of  their  enemies.  Moreover,  the  greatness  of  the  work 
shews  that  it  was  a  princely  fortification  *." 

I  venture  to  declare  that  this  account  is  very  inaccurate,  though  it  has  been  very 
confidentl  referred  to  by  several  modern  tourists  in  support  of  their  own  personal  observar 
tion.  I  will  not  assert  that  the  fortress  was  not  guarded  with  a  treble  wall,  though  I  did 
not  make  it  out ;  but  it  is  evident  to  the  most  careless  eye,  that  the  towers,  as  they  are 
called,  are  not  of  equal  bigness,  and  Mr.  Pennant,  though  he  premises  that  he  found  Sir 
John  Wynn's  account  *  very  just,'  states  in  his  own  description  of  the  '  circular  buildings,' 
(and  no  one  describes  with  more  fidelity)  that '  their  diameter  in  general  is  from  twelve  to 
eighteen  feet ;  but  that  some  were  far  less,  not  exceeding  five.'  If  it  had  been  said  that 
twenty  thousand  men  could  stand  within  the  whole  space  included  by  all  the  walls,  I 
know  not  that  it  would  have  been  true ;  but  to  say  that  there  are  lodgings  for  so  many  in 
the  circular  inclosures,  is  a  most  unmeasured  exaggeration.  Admitting  that  there  are  a 
hundred  of  them,  each  eighteen  feet  in  diameter,  we  shall  be  puzzled  to  find  room  in  each 
for  two  hundred  men,  unless  Sir  John  Wynn  supposed  that  the  towers  were  several  stories 
high,  a  conjecture,  which  few,  I  imagine,  will  accede  to  who  have  seen  the  remains,  for 

*  Gibson's  Camden,  Vol.  II.  p.  804. 

in 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  45 

in  no  single  instance  do  the  stones  (and  who  would  take  such  stones  away  ?)  lie  in  such 
heaps  as  can  authorize  us  to  conclude  that  they  were  ever  more  than  five  or  six  feet  in  height. 
But  when  we  remember  that,  out  of  the  hundred  towers,  one  third  do  not  exceed  five  feet 
in  diameter,  how  many  of  the  twenty  thousand  men  would  remain  unhoused,  allowing  that 
the  buildings  were  two  or  three  or  four  stories  high  ?  It  seems  obvious  to  me  that  Sir 
John,  in  his  anxiety  to  do  justice  to  the  ingenuity  and  magnificence  of  his  ancestors,  has 
been  deceived  into  very  hyperbolical  measures  and  phrases,  or  he  would  not  have  ap- 
plied the  terms  castle,  towers,  and  princely  fortification,  to  structures  which,  on  the  first 
sight  of  them,  are  so  clearly  the  work  of  a  people  but  just  on  the  threshold  of  art. 

At  the  remote  period  when  these  fortifications  were  thrown  up,  an  army  of  twenty 
thousand  men  could  seldom  have  been  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  hiding  themselves  upon 
a  rock  among  the  clouds,  and,  if  pushed  to  such  an  extremity  by  an  enemy  superior  in 
numbers  or  power,  Penmaen  Mawr,  it  appears  to  me,  would  not  have  been  a  well-chosen 
spot  to  retreat  to,  for,  being  an  insulated  mountain,  an  army  confined  upon  it  must  either 
have  submitted  to  starve  or  descend  down  to  the  plain  for  supplies.  I  presume  that,  as 
such  a  spot  was  not  fit  for  the  permanent  habitation  of  man,  it  was,  of  course,  never  perma- 
nently garrisoned  and  constantly  supplied  with  provisions  for  a  siege.  On  the  whole,  I 
rather  imagine  that  it  was  not  designed  for  the  shelter  of  large  armies,  but  as  a  common 
place  of  refuge,  to  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  near  it  might  fly  with  their  property 
at  a  time  when  they  were  exposed  to  the  sudden  and  short  incursions  of  piratical  invaders, 
and  here  a  few  might  defend  themselves  against  a  multitude.  I  may  mention,  that  the 
well,  which  is  not  filled  by  a  spring,  but  by  the  vapour  which  hangs  over  the  mountain, 
Avas  not  large  enough  to  have  supplied  any  considerable  number  of  people  even  for  a  day. 

This  fortress,  in  its  form  and  mode  of  construction,  very  much  resembles  one  men- 
tioned by  Doctor  Johnson  in  the  Isle  of  Sky,  called  a  Dun,  or  a  Borough.  He  describes 
it  as  a  circular  inclosure  about  forty-two  feet  in  diameter,  encompassed  with  very  thick 
walls,  built  with  loose  stones,  and  having  within  the  great  circle  several  smaller  rounds  of 
wall  which  formed  distinct  apartments.  Mr.  Macqueen,  a  gentleman  weH  versed  in  such 
subjects,  was  of  opinion  that  it  was  a  Danish  fort,  but  Johnson  himself  decided  that  it 
could  not  have  been  a  fortress,  as  there  was  no  provision  for  water. — "  I  am  inclined  to 
suspect,"  he  observes,  "  that,  in  lawless  times,  when  the  inhabitants  of  every  mountain 
stole  the  cattle  of  their  neighbour,  these  inclosures  were  used  to  secure  the  herds  and 
flocks  in  the  night.  When  they  were  driven  within  the  wall,  they  might  be  easily  watched, 
and  defended  as  long  as  could  be  needful;  for  the  robbers  durst  not  wait  till  the  injured 
clan  should  find  them  in  the  morning*/'  The  thickness  of  the  walls,  however,  seems  to 
declare  that  they  were  built  as  a  defence  against  more  serious  attacks  than  the  doctor  has 
contemplated. 

*  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  p.  80. 

Braich 


46  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Braich  y  Ddinas  has  been  universally  regarded  as  a  place  of  strength,  except  by  a 
single  antiquary,  Governor  Pownall,  who  has  treated  with  great  contempt  the  statements 
of  those  who  have  maintained  what  he  thinks  so  preposterous  an  opinion.  The  governor 
surveyed  the  work  in  person,  and,  unaccountably  enough,  did  not  remark  the  only  very 
evident  parts  of  it,  the  circular  inclosures,  and  somewhat  triumphantly  declared,  that  they 
did  not  exist,  and  that  it  was  very  clear  from  the  figure  and  disposition  of  every  part  of 
the  structure  which  was  really  to  be  seen,  that  this  was  a  consecrated  high  place  of  worship 
of  the  Druids.  He  was  afterwards  convinced,  however,  from  the  communications  of  Mr. 
Pennant,  that  the  inclosures  which  he  had  overlooked  were  not  merely  the  creation  of 
fancy,  and  then  found  out  that  every  one  of  them  was  a  new  proof  of  the  Druidical  origin 
of  the  whole,  and  proceeded  to  give  an  elaborate  and  very  whimsical  explanation  of  it  in 
all  its  combinations  and  relations  *.  The  general  belief,  nevertheless,  is  still  in  favour  of 
the  military  character  of  the  work.  Surely,  if  this  had  been  a  grand  sanctuary  of  the 
Druids,  so  well  protected  by  its  natural  strength  against  invasion,  they  would  have  fled 
hither  from  the  Romans,  and  not  have  left  the  fate  of  their  sovereignty  to  be  decided  on 
the  defenceless  plains  of  Mona. 

It  is  practicable,  I  believe,  to  descend  down  the  northern  side  of  the  mountain,  but  I 
returned  by  the  same  path  by  which  I  had  ascended,  that  I  might  not  miss  the  celebrated 
road  cut  upon  its  face.  My  guide  led  me  to  a  little  hut  not  far  from  the  foot  of  the 
mountain,  of  unpromising  exterior,  but  in  which  I  found  a  barley  loaf,  whose  colour  my 
walk  up  to  the  clouds  had  disposed  me  not  to  object  to,  and,  thus  recruited,  I  continued 
my  journey.  The  pass  over  Penmaen  Mawr  ascends  easily  from  its  southern  extremity,  and 
the  chief  terrors  of  the  traveller  are  centered  in  that  part  of  the  mountain  which  rises  over 
his  head.  The  precipice  beneath  him  is  guarded  by  a  strong  wall,  but,  if  on  horseback, 
or  in  a  carriage,  he  is  raised  above  this  bulwark,  and  may  cast  his  eye  over  it,  and  find  full 
employment  for  his  imagination  during  every  moment  that  it  can  spare  from  the  rocks 
above.  The  whole  western  front  of  the  mountain  strikes  down  to  the  sea  with  a  very 
rapid  descent,  fcnd  the  great  mass  of  bare  rock  which  forms  the  summit  is,  on  this  side, 
quite  perpendicular.  There  is  very  little  vegetation  on  this  front,  almost  the  whole  surface 
being  covered  with  loose  stones,  amongst  which  are  many  huge  fragments,  some  lying  in 
very  alarming  positions.  Two  of  these  of  immense  size,  and  not  far  above  the  road,  had 
low  walls  built  under  them  for  their  support,  but  so  slight  that  they  served  rather  to  point 
out  the  danger  than  to  give  an  assurance  of  its  being  guarded  against.  In  the  solid  rock 
I  observed  the  marks  of  recent  falls,  and  in  various  parts  of  the  wall  there  were  considerable 
breaches  made  by  large  stones  precipitated  from  the  steep  above.  All  these  signs  are 
more  than  sufficient  to  keep  the  nerves  in  play,  if  a  man  have  any,  and  fully  prove  that 
an  accident  might  happen,  but  I  have  not  heard  that  any  injury  has  been  suffered  on  the 

*  Vide  two  letters  in  the  Archaeologia  of  the  Antiq.  Soc.  Vol.  III. 

road 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  47 

road  by  man  or  brute  since  its  first  formation  in  1772.  Falls  are  most  frequent  in  the 
winter  time,  occasioned  by  the  rushing  down  of  torrents,  and  sometimes  by  thaws  fol- 
lowing severe  frosts ;  but  they  occur  at  all  seasons,  and  my  guide  pointed  out  two  breaches 
in  the  wall  which  he  did  not  recollect'  to  have  seen  on  passing  over  the  road  ten  days 
before.  The  most  terrific  crash  that  is  remembered  happened  during  a  violent  thunder- 
storm, in  the  evening  of  the  31st  of  July,  1801,  when  a  mass  of  rock,  supposed  to  weigh 
several  thousand  tons,  was  loosened  from  its  bed  high  up  the  side  of  the  mountain  by  a 
sudden  torrent,  and  tumbled  down  into  the  sea,  bearing  along  with  it  a  stream  of  stones 
which  entirely  blocked  up  the  road.  A  woman  with  a  horse  had  but  just  passed  the  spot 
before  the  fragment  fell,  and  was  near  enough  to  hear  it  in  its  tremendous  descent,  and  to 
feel,  no  doubt,  a  most  thrilling  sense  of  her  narrow  escape. 

After  having  so  lately  clambered  up  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  I  was  not  par- 
ticularly struck  with  the  road  till  I  reached  its  highest  point,  where  the  eye,  whether  it 
turn  to  the  right  or  left,  is  presented  with  a  grand  and  really  terrible  sight.  On  one  side 
is  a  precipice  descending  to  the  sea,  a  hundred  and  ninety  feet  deep,  and  on  the  other  a 
wall  of  rock  rises  perpendicularly  to  a  great  height,  when  it  juts  out  and  overhangs  the 
road,  not  in  a  compact  mass,  but  split  and  rent  into  crags  of  all  rugged  forms,  and  pro- 
jecting in  various  threatening  attitudes.  This  is  by  far  the  most  appalling  part  of  the 
pass,  and  I  here  involuntarily  quickened  my  pace  before  I  could  pause  to  calculate 
chances,  and  remember  that  I  was  on  a  turnpike  road.  It  has  been  usual  in  describing 
this  noted  pass,  to  add  the  roaring  of  the  sea  to  the  other  horrors  which  conspire  to  scare 
the  traveller;  but  though  I  admit  that  such  an  accompaniment  might  much  improve  the 
general  effect,  yet  truth,  or  the  Lavan  Sands,  compel  me  to  declare  that  there  is  not  a 
sufficient  depth  of  water  along  shore  to  produce  a  roar,  certainly  not  a  roar  that  can  startle 
the  ears  of  a  person  elevated  nearly  two  hundred  feet  above  it. 

After  passing  a  few  paces  down  the  northern  declivity  of  the  road,  all  possible  dan- 
ger ceases,  and  you  descend  slowly  into  a  rich  plain,  chequered  with  corn  fields  and  mea- 
dows, which  are  continued  along  the  margin  of  the  sea,  till  again  suddenly  cut  off  by  the 
rugged  promontory  of  Penmaen  Bach.  This  little  plain,  fixed  in  a  recess  of  the  mountains, 
screened  from  every  harsh  wind,  and  open  to  the  western  sun,  is  blest  with  a  most  luxuriant 
fertility,  and  at  this  period  its  various  vegetation  appeared  under  its  most  pleasing  colours. 
One  might  have  paused  to  admire  such  a  landscape  wherever  found,  but  a  scene  of  such 
mild  and  placid  beauty,  amidst  the  rudeness  and  horror  of  these  savage  rocks,  had  an  ex- 
quisite charm,  and  filled  the  mind  with  a  delightful  contrariety  of  images.  The  mountains 
which  guard  it  describe  a  large  segment  of  a  circle,  at  the  extremities  of  which  stand  the 
magnificent  promontories  of  Penmaen  Mawr  and  Penmaen  Bach.  The  latter,  though  not 
near  so  lofty  as  Penmaen  Mawr,  is  quite  as  rugged  and  more  inaccessible,  rising  on  three 
sides  in  sudden  precipices,  which  render  all  passage  over  it  impracticable.  It  projects 
further  into  the  sea  than  the  greater  Penmaen,  and  is  separated  at  its  east  end,  from  the 

ui;i  in 


48  VOYAGE    WOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

main  chain,  by  a  singular  chasm,  called  Sychnant,  or  the  Dry  Hollow,  which  gives 
its  name  to  a  mountain  that  bounds  it  on  one  side.  At  low  water  you  may  here  avoid 
all  further  hills  by  going  along  the  sands,  and  rounding  the  western  point  of  Penmaen 
Bach,  may  escape  over  a  flat  marsh  to  Conway :  but  at  high  tide  this  outlet  is  closed, 
and  nothing  remains  for  you  but  to  make  up  your  mind  and  your  wind  for  the  steep 
and  laborious  ascent  of  Sychnant,  over  which  the  road  is  carried.  These  Alpine  roads, 
particularly  the  pass  of  Penmaen  Mawr,  have  often  moved  the  admiration,  and  called 
forth  the  praises  of  tourists,  and,  compared  with  the  perilous  path  which  they  super- 
seded in  the  same  track*,  they  are  well  worthy  of  praise,  and,  intrinsically,  indeed,  are 
striking  examples  of  what  art  and  labour  can  accomplish.  But  they  have  not  been 
laid  out  with  a  critical  attention  to  the  capabilities  of  the  ground ;  difficulties  have  been 
subdued  which  it  was  not  necessary  to  have  encountered,  and  though  the  roads  may  be 
as  easy  and  secure  as  it  was  possible  to  make  them  in  the  line  that  has  been  chosen,  yet 
they  are  not  near  so  good  as  they  might  have  been,  had  they  been  made  at  a  lower  level, 
where  they  might  have  been  completed  too  with  less  labour  and  expense.  According  to  the 
plan  now  before  parliament,  for  the  improvement  of  the  Holyhead  roads,  many  alterations 
are  proposed  in  the  mountainous  track  through  Caernarvonshire,  and  among  them  an  en- 
tirely new  line  is  recommended  for  Penmaen  Mawr,  leading  along  its  base,  a  little  above 
high-water  mark,  and  continued  at  the  same  level  as  far  as  the  marsh,  to  the  westward  of 
the  town  of  Conway.  This  work  is  to  be  effected  partly  by  removing  fragments  and  cutting 
through  rock,  and  partly  by  constructing  breast-works,  all  of  which  operations  are  con- 
sidered to  be  perfectly  practicable,  and  objectionable  only  on  account  of  the  expense, — a 
consideration,  truly,  of  no  mean  importance,  though  somewhat  tardily  introduced.  If 
there  had  been  the  slightest  feeling  for  it,  when  the  first  grant  was  accorded  for  the  forma- 
tion of  the  present  road,  the  money  would  not  have  been  so  employed  as  to  render  a  new 
charge  necessary ;  but  the  style  of  management  adopted  in  this  instance  is  not  altogether 
unusual  in  works  that  are  paid  for  by  the  public.  If  the  proposed  plan  should  be  exe- 
cuted, it  will  be  much  to  the  benefit  of  travellers,  whose  chief  satisfaction  is  ease  and 
speed,  but  tourists  hunting  after  something  to  wonder  at  and  talk  about  will  pursue  the 
old  track  as  long  as  it  is  left  open  to  them. 

After  having  surmounted  Penmaen  Mawr,  the  road  is  continued  along  the  edge  of  the 
plain  before  described,  till  winding  round  a  projecting  rock,  that  huge  promontory  is  shut 
out  from  the  view,  and  Sychnant  appears  before  you  rising  from  the  verdant  bottom  of 

*  Mr.  Pennant  thus  describes  the  state  of  the  pass  over  Penmaen  Mawr,  previous  to  the  formation  of  the  present 
road.  "  In  past  times  it  was  justly  the  terror  of  the  traveller;  extremely  narrow,  bad,  and  stony;  and  what  added  to 
his  fears,  for  a  considerable  way  the  danger  increased  with  his  progress,  by  reason  of  the  precipice  gaining  additional 
height.  Generally  it  was  without  the  protection  of  a  wall  to  secure  him  in  case  of  a  false  step;  which  might,  in  the 
loftiest  place,  precipitate  him  some  scores  of  yards,  either  on  sharp  rocks  or  into  the  sea,  according  to  the  state  of  the 
tide.  A  vein  of  a  crumbling  stratum  in  one  part  so  contracted  the  road  as  to  excite  new  horrors." 

Dwygyfylchi, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  49 

Dwygyfylchi,  more  beautiful  in  nature  than  in  name.  This  deep  and  lonely  hollow  is 
darkened  with  a  wild  thicket  of  wood,  principally  mountain-ash,  through  the  midst  of 
which  runs  a  shallow,  rapid  stream,  almost  concealed  by  the  intermingling  branches  of 
the  trees,  but  cheering  the  solitude  with"  its  ceaseless  music.  At  a  short  distance  from  the 
bridge  commences  the  ascent  of  Sychnant,  which,  if  to  appearance  a  less  dangerous  pass 
than  Penmaen  Mawr,  is  more  romantic  and  picturesque.  The  front  of  the  mountain  is 
dreadfully  rugged  and  steep,  and  the  road  is  continued  up  it  to  the  height  of  five  hundred 
and  forty-three  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  wildness  of  the  scene  deepened  around 
me  as  I  ascended,  and  when  I  had  nearly  reached  the  top  of  the  hill  it  became  as  desolate 
and  horrible  as  any  thing  I  had  hitherto  seen  among  the  mountains.  Vast  rocks  starting 
up  in  the  most  jagged  and  grotesque  crags  closed  me  in  to  the  right  and  in  front,  and  to 
my  left  was  a  tremendous  precipice,  which  looked  into  the  gloomy  gulf  called  the  dry 
hollow,  not  more  than  three  or  four  yards  wide  at  the  bottom,  from  whence  on  the  other 
side  rose  Penmaen  Bach,  almost  perpendicularly,  and  covered  with  a  sheet  of  loose  stones, 
unrelieved  by  a  blade  of  vegetation.  At  its  highest  elevation  the  road  is  cut  very  deep, 
and  thrown  into  deep  shadow  by  the  dark  and  naked  rocks  which  compass  it  on  every 
side.  Such  a  place  in  romance  must  have  swarmed  with  banditti ;  and  had  I  been  think- 
ing of  romances,  the  sound  of  a  horn  and  the  trampling  of  horses,  which  I  heard  on  a 
sudden  as  I  paused  here,  might  have  startled  me  a  little ;  but  as  I  happened  to  be  broad 
awake,  I  did  not  conceive  for  a  moment  that  there  was  any  thing  coming  but  a  stage- 
coach. Banditti  would  have  been  more  picturesque,  but  this  commonplace  object 
was  not  without  interest  here,  for  in  so  rude  a  track  it  seemed  to  be  travelling  quite  in 
a  foreign  element,  and  one  looked  at  it  with  almost  as  much  wonder  as  if  one  had  met  it 
at  sea. 

On  descending  a  little  down  the  hill  you  emerge  from  this  gloom  and  confinement, 
and,  standing  on  the  last  step  of  the  great  range  of  Snowdonian  mountains,  an  altered  and 
beautiful  prospect  bursts  upon  the  sight — the  towers  of  Conway  and  a  bend  of  its  fine 
river,  backed  by  the  green  hills  of  Denbighshire,  cultivated  up  to  their  summits.  I  had  been 
surprised  in  the  course  of  this  day's  excursion  by  many  unexpected  changes  of  scenery, 
but  none  was  more  impressive  than  this  last  view,  thus  abruptly  disclosed,  and  the  contrast 
ot  the  smiling  hills,  which  suddenly  appeared  before  me,  with  the  dark  and  savage  moun- 
tains that  hemmed  me  in  on  every  other  side.  A  continued  descent  of  nearly  two  miles 
leads  from  hence  to  Conway,  whose  lofty  Avails  and  ranges  of  towers  excite,  as  you  ap- 
proach it,  high  ideas  of  its  dignity  and  consequence.  I  entered  the  town  through  a  grand 
gateway,  guarded  by  a  double  tower,  in  itself  a  castle,  equal  in  size  to  most  of  those  raised 
in  Wales  before  it  was  subjected  to  the  magnificent  designs  of  Edward  the  First.  After 
passing  this  barrier  a  minute's  walk  at  once  puts  to  flight  all  thoughts  of  pomp  and  pride, 
and  all  objects,  streets,  houses,  and  people,  conspire  to  assure  you  that  you  are  in  one  of 
VOL.  ii,  n  the 


50  VOYAGE    HOUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

the  meanest  and  filthiest  of  Welsh  towns.  There  is  a  tolerable  inn,  the  only  thing  in 
modern  Conway  that  can  gratify  a  traveller,  and  truly  we  felt  in  it  all  becoming  joy  and 
pride,  well  pleased,  after  so  much  painful  experience,  that  in  this  instance  we  were  not 
obliged  to  share  all  the  dirt  and  wretchedness  that  we  saw. 

When  seen  from  without,  the  appearance  of  the  town  is  extremely  beautiful  and  pic- 
turesque, the  height  of  the  walls  concealing  all  its  meaner  parts,  and  all  that  the  inhabitants 
have  done  and  are  doing  to  offend  the  senses,  or  that  interferes  with  the  simplicity  of 
design,  and  regularity  and  compactness,  which  are  characteristic  of  a  military  town.  The 
walls  are  built,  with  some  little  irregularity,  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,  guarded  by  twenty- 
four  round  towers,  and  entered  by  four  gates.  They  are  more  than  a  mile  in  circumference, 
but  the  town  does  not  near  fill  up  the  space  which  they  inclose.  They,  as  well  as  the 
numerous  towers  which  flank  them,  are  still  quite  entire,  except  about  the  battlements, 
and  these,  by  being  a  little  broken,  have  become  more  interesting  to  the  artist,  and  more 
enticing  to  the  eye  of  the  antiquary.  The  base  of  the  triangle  borders  the  river,  and 
at  its  south  corner,  high  raised  on  a  steep  rock,  stands  the  castle,  without  doubt  one  of  the 
most  mighty  and  majestic  fabrics  that  this  country  can  boast.  Its  form  is  an  oblong 
square,  defended  by  eight  round  towers  of  vast  bulk  and  commanding  height,  whose  fronts 
form  an  unbroken  line  with  the  face  of  the  precipitous  rock  on  which  they  stand.  Four 
of  these  enormous  towers  are  seen  to  the  utmost  advantage  from  the  base  of  the  rock, 
ranged  in  a  line  nearly  in  front  of  the  river,  and  composing  the  finest  masses  of  building 
that  can  be  imagined — not  remarkable  for  any  beauty  or  splendour  of  architecture,  but 
representing  a  most  striking  image  of  grandeur,  dignity,  and  power. 

It  is  supposed  that  this  castle  and  the  castle  of  Caernarvon  were  designed  by  the  same 
architect,  and  it  is  difficult  to  decide  which  is  most  worthy  of  admiration,  though  the  style 
and  character  of  the  two  buildings  are  perfectly  distinct.  In  that  of  Caernarvon  we  are 
most  struck  with  the  beauty  and  elegance  of  all  its  parts,  and  the  admirable  skill  which  in 
so  massive  a  structure  has  preserved  an  effect  of  such  graceful  lightness ;  but  there  are 
none  of  these  distinctions  in  Conway  Castle,  which  is  huge  and  ponderous  without  disguise, 
and  has  perhaps  a  more  appropriate  character  than  its  rival  as  a  military  work,  disdaining  all 
petty  graces,  and  awing  the  mind  with  its  aspect  of  simple  greatness  and  impregnable 
strength.  Its  situation  on  the  verge  of  a  perpendicular  rock  is  exceedingly  fine,  and  it  is 
seen  from  various  points  of  view  in  combination  with  some  of  the  grandest  scenery  in  the 
country.  Indeed  the  three  great  castles  of  Edward  in  Wales  are  all  very  remarkable  for 
the  nobleness  of  their  situations,  but  that  of  Conway  made  the  greatest  impression  on  my 
mind,  nor  will  any  one  I  imagine  think  that  I  have  said  too  much  of  it,  who  has  had  a 
sight  of  this  majestic  fortress,  rising  abruptly  from  the  brink  of  a  broad  river,  with  one 
front  looking  over  to  a  line  of  beautiful  hills,  and  another  guarded  by  a  range  of  tre- 
mendous mountains. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  51 

The  external  walls  of  all  the  towers  are  entire,  except  of  one,  at  the  east  end  of  the 
building,  and  this,  in  its  present  state  of  mutilation,  forms,  as  a  spectacle,  the  most  in- 
teresting object  about  the  castle.  More  than  half  of  the  front,  the  lower  part  of  it,  has 
fallen  down,  and  the  remainder  now  hangs  suspended  sixty  or  seventy  feet  above  the 
ground,  and  projected  at  least  thirty  feet  into  the  air.  It  has  been  in  this  state  for  nearly 
a  century,  and  may  continue  in  the  same  state  for  a  century  to  come ;  but  as  you  stand 
under  it,  and  cast  your  eyes  up  to  this  tremendous  ruin  hanging  over  you,  it  is  not  easy  to 
persuade  the  feelings  that  it  will  not  come  down  upon  }'our  head.  The  back  of  the  tower 
is  strongly  founded  on  the  solid  rock,  and  the  broken  front  is  held  firmly  attached  to  it  by 
the  strength  of  the  cement ;  but  when  we  consider  the  degree  of  its  projection  and  its 
vast  bulk,  its  long  preservation  in  this  critical  posture  is  very  singular,  and  to  the 
eye  it  appears  marvellous  indeed.  The  ruins  lie  on  the  sands  beneath  in  enormous  frag- 
ments, preserving  the  whole  thickness  of  the  wall,  which  is  eleven  feet. 

The  fall  of  this  tower  is  said  to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  poor  people  of  the  place, 
who  were  in  the  habit  of  picking  away  slates  from  the  rock  beneath  it,  and  the  same  mis- 
chievous experiment  seems  to  have  been  begun  upon  the  foundation  of  the  tower  next  to 
it,  though  not  continued  to  an  extent  that  endangers  its  security.  The  broken  tower  is  so 
curious  an  object  that  its  damage  may  not  be  regretted,  but  one  of  the  kind  is  really  quite 
sufficient,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  owner  of  this  noble  work  will  guard  it  against  any 
further  injury  from  wilful  violence. 

As  a  place  of  defence  this  castle  stood  unrivalled  by  any  other  in  the  country  at  the 
time  of  its  construction,  but  it  is  commanded  by  neighbouring  heights,  which  render  it 
quite  open  to  the  power  of  artillery.  It  is  bounded  on  one  side  by  the  main  stream  of  the 
Conway,  on  another  by  a  creek,  diverging  from  it,  and  is  cut  off  from  the  town  by  a  deep 
fosse,  which  was  formerly  passed  by  means  of  a  drawbridge.  All  attack  from  the  side  of 
the  river  was  guarded  against  by  a  curtain,  terminating  in  a  round  tower,  raised  at  each 
extremity  of  the  lower  face  of  the  walls,  and  projecting  a  considerable  distance  into  the 
river.  There  are  still  some  remains  of  one  of  these,  but  the  other  has  totally  disappeared. 
There  are  two  entrances,  the  main  one  of  which  leads  from  the  town  over  the  fosse,  but  it 
has  nothing  of  grandeur  about  it,  like  the  noble  entrance  into  Caernarvon  Castle,  the  skill 
of  the  architect  having  been  here  exclusively  employed  upon  the  great  object  of  security. 
In  the  interior  of  the  building  there  is  little  to  notice  but  ruins,  though  in  some  of  the 
apartments  there  are  still  some  traces  of  former  magnificence,  which  serve  to  give  them 
a  moral  interest,  and  call  forth  meditation  and  melancholy.  The  Great  Hall  was  a  spa- 
cious and  well  proportioned  apartment,  a  hundred  and  thirty  feet  in  length,  and  thirty-two 
feet  in  breadth.  The  roof  was  supported  by  eight  elegant  arches  of  freestone,  four  of 
which  are  still  remaining.  It  is  lighted  by  nine  windows,  and  at  its  east  end  is  one  of 
larger  dimensions,  and  more  richly  ornamented  than  the  rest,  which  is  supposed  to  have 
belonged  to  a  small  chapel.  We  found  some  amusement  ift  exploring  every  corner  of  this 

H  2  silent 


52  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

silent  and  desolate  building,  in  company  with  a  very  venerable  and  garrulous  guide,  but 
we  saw  little  and  heard  little  in  the  course  of  our  scramblings  that  deserves  to  be  mentioned. 
The  four  eastern  towers,  one  of  which  is  called  the  King's,  are  each  crowned  with  a  lofty 
turret,  and  are  ranged  round  a  small  court,  which  opens  into  a  larger  one,  through  a  strongly- 
guarded  gateway,  a  precaution  adopted  no  doubt  for  the  more  perfect  security -of  the  royal 
apartments.  These  bear  the  marks  of  far  more  costly  finishing  than  those  of  any  of  the 
other  towers,  and  they  have  fortunately  suffered  less  from  violence  and  pillage.  In  one  of 
the  chambers  there  is  a  beautiful  gothic  recess  in  the  wull,  with  a  vaulted  roof,  supported 
by  intersecting  arches,  which  spring  from  light  pillars,  ranged  round  the  sides.  It  is 
lighted  by  three  windows,  which  command  a  noble  view  down  the  river.  This  pretty 
closet  bears  the  reputation  of  having  been  Queen  Eleanor's  Oriel,  or  toilet-chamber,  a 
sanctuary  once  common  in  the  house  of  every  person  of  rank,  and  always  ornamented  with 
peculiar  elegance,  as  became  the  graceful  service  for  which  it  was  reserved.  We  passed 
from  this  interesting  spot  into  the  broken  tower,  which  our  guide,  God  help  him!  thought 
far  more  worthy  of  admiration,  containing,  as  it  did,  in  unreduced  dimensions,  the  great 
garrison-oven.  "  Many  a  fine  fat  joint  has  come  smoking  from  this  cold,  damp  hole," 
said  he ;  and  he  really  gazed  at  the  place  with  as  much  earnestness  as  if  he  had  had  the 
stomach  of  a  regiment. 

This  tower  is  seen  to  more  advantage  from  hence  than  from  the  sands  below,  for  here 
the  enormous  thickness  of  the  walls,  said  to  be  eleven  feet,  is  more  evident  to  the  eye. 
You  may  advance  a  little  way  into  the  tower,  till  you  find  yourself  at  the  brink  of  a 
perpendicular  rock,  more  than  sixty  feet  high,  and  from  this  station  the  huge,  baseless  bow, 
suspended  over  the  precipice,  has  the  most  astonishing  appearance  that  can  be  conceived. 

The  military  history  of  this  fortress  is  very  barren,  it  being  built  immediately  after  the 
death  of  Prince  Llewelyn,  an  event  which,  if  it  did  not  quite  subdue  the  spirit  of  the 
Welsh,  effectually  destroyed  their  power  of  resistance.  The  unfortunate  Richard  the 
Second,  on  his  return  from  Ireland  in  1399,  took  refuge  in  Conway,  with  an  intention  of 
making  a  stand  against  the  forces  of  Bolingbroke ;  but  he  fled  in  dismay,  while  the  enemy 
were  still  at  a  distance,  and  the  castle  was  not  doomed  to  experience  the  honours  of  a  siege 
till  the  reign  of  Charles  the  First.  In  1642  it  was  garrisoned  for  the  king  by  Williams, 
Archbishop  of  York,  who  had  received  in  charge  the  whole  of  North  Wales.  He  repaired 
the  fortifications  at  his  own  expense,  and  being  a  man  of  great  ability,  and  of  a  daring 
and  energetic  character,  was  looked  up  to  with  great  confidence  by  all  the  loyalists  round 
the  country.  Numerous  families,  alarmed  at  the  precariousness  of  all  property  in  those 
turbulent  times,  consigned  over  their  plate  and  jewels  to  the  archbishop,  who  accepted 
the  trust,  giving  to  every  one  a  receipt  for  his  goods,  by  which  he  acknowledged  himself 
responsible  for  their  security.  A  man  of  such  great  loyalty  and  popularity  seemed  to  be 
admirably  calculated  for  the  station  that  he  filled,  but  through  some  mysterious  policy  of 
the  court  he  was  not  permitted  to  consummate  his  plans,  but  was  suddenly  superseded  in 

his 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  53 

his  command,  in  May  1645,  by  Prince  Rupert,  who  put  Sir  John  Owen  into  possession 
of  the  castle,  dispossessing  the  prelate  of  his  authority  with  unceremonious  violence,  and 
refusing  to  give  him  any  security  for  the  private  property  that  he  had  received  into  his 
custody.  Such  an  outrage  was  sufficient  to  have  exasperated  a  cooler  spirit  than  that  of 
this  high-mettled  Welshman,  and  had  his  duty  to  the  king  involved  no  other  obligations 
than  what  are  common  between  man  and  man,  he  might  have  given  the  reins  to  his 
resentment  without  reproach  ;  but  as  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  he  embarked  in  the  royal  cause 
as  the  one  most  promising  to  the  good  of  the  country,  he  could  not,  it  appears  obvious  to 
me,  make  his  wrongs  an  excuse  for  a  breach  of  his  allegiance.  He,  however,  acted  from 
a  different  persuasion,  and  has  not  wanted  apologists  for  his  conduct.  In  June,  1646,  the 
king's  affairs  had  become  desperate,  and  at  this  critical  period  the  archbishop  could  not 
resist  the  opportunity  of  making  his  peace  with  the  parliament,  and  therefore  went  over 
to  General  Mytton,  by  whom  his  offers  of  service  were  readily  accepted.  Having  a  cor- 
rect knowledge  of  the  most  vulnerable  parts  of  his  own  works  in  the  castle,  he  advised  the 
general  to  carry  it  by  storm,  which  was  effected  on  the  15th  of  August,  when  the  martial 
churchman  proved  his  hearty  co-operation  in  his  new  cause  by  assisting  personally  at  the 
attack,  in  the  heat  of  which  he  received  a  wound  in  his  neck.  Whether  he  may  be  said 
to  have  covered  himself  with  glory  by  his  exploits,  I  shall  not  pause  to  settle  further:  his 
baser  interests  at  least  were  well  served  by  his  tergiversation.  The  parliament  granted 
him  a  general  pardon  in  consideration  of  his  services,  and  General  Mytton  relieved  him 
from  all  anxiety  about  the  goods  that  he  had  made  himself  responsible  for,  by  restoring 
them  to  their  respective  owners. 

The  cannon  of  Cromwell  made  sad  havoc  with  most  of  the  castles  in  Wales,  but  this 
grand  fabric  was  by  a  special  indulgence  permitted  to  stand  uninjured.  What  was  spared 
however,  even  by  the  blind  rage  of  war,  was  doomed  to  fall  a  more  ignoble  sacrifice  to  the 
greedy  hands  of  cold-blooded  avarice.  The  castle  was  granted  by  Charles  the  Second  to 
Edward  Earl  of  Con  way,  who  conceived  that  he  could  by  no  means  turn  it  to  such  good 
account  as  by  stripping  it  of  its  lead,  iron,  and  timber.  Every  man  of  taste  and  feeling 
in  the  country  loudly  remonstrated  against  so  monstrous  an  act,  but  the  earl  justified  it  by 
representing  that  the  materials  were  intended  for  the  king's  use,  and  carrying  his  barbarous 
design  into  execution,  reduced  the  building  to  its  present  ruinous  condition. 

Conway  has  few  other  antiquities  that  deserve  notice.  A  Cistercian  Abbey  was 
founded  here  by  Llewelyn  ap  Jorwerth,  and  endowed  with  numerous  and  distinguished 
privileges.  Pennant  describes  some  remains  of  it,  but  there  is  now  not  a  vestige  to  be 
seen.  In  the  town  there  is  a  large  old  house,  called  Plas  Mawr,  or  the  Great  Palace, 
built  by  the  Wynns  of  Gwedir,  the  last  faded  remnant  of  splendour  left  to  remind  us  that 
Conway  was  once  noted  for  its  gentility.  It  has  gained  nothing  in  compensation  for  the 
loss  of  its  former  courtly  character,  no  interest  in  manufactures  or  trade  of  any  kind,  but  is 
altogether  as  wretched  a  looking  place  as  any  that  we  had  visited  in  the  whole  principality. 

A  few 


54  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

A  few  small  vessels  belong  to  the  port,  which  carry  away  the  produce  of  the  valley,  corn, 
oak-bark,  and  timber,  to  Scotland  and  Ireland.  The  river  is  navigable  as  high  up  as 
Llanrwst,  twelve  miles  above  Conway,  but  it  has  a  bar  at  its  mouth,  and  all  the  lower  part 
of  the  channel  is  rendered  extremely  dangerous  by  shifting  sand-banks. 

Conway  Ferry  has  called  forth  many  a  peevish  paragraph  from  indignant  tourists,  but 
I  shall  not  add  my  voice  to  the  chorus,  as  there  is  a  prospect  of  speedily  seeing  all  cause 
of  complaint  on  this  subject  removed  by  the  construction  of  a  bridge.  A  design  for  one 
has  already  been  made  by  Mr.  Telford  the  engineer,  and  approved  of  by  the  committee 
appointed  to  consider  the  best  means  of  improving  the  Holyhead  roads.  Opposite  to  the 
castle  there  is  a  small  rocky  island  well  adapted  for  the  foundation  of  piers;  and  over  the 
space  between  this  and  the  castle  Mr.  Telford  proposes  to  throw  a  cast-iron  arch  of  two 
hundred  feet  span.  Behind  the  east  abutment  of  this  arch  a  channel  is  to  be  cut  through 
the  rock,  wide  and  deep  enough  to  admit  the  largest  vessels  that  frequent  the  river;  and 
over  it  is  to  be  placed  a  drawbridge.  The  remainder  of  the  island  is  to  be  crossed  by  three 
arches  of  fifty  feet  span  each,  and  the  road  continued  over  the  sands  to  the  eastern  bank 
of  the  river  by  means  of  a  stone  embankment.  This  plan  is  considered  to  be  the  most 
economical  and  practicable  that  can  be  devised,  and  not  in  the  slightest  degree  preju- 
dicial to  the  navigation  of  the  river.  The  whole  length  of  the  road  will  be  seven  hun- 
dred and  forty-four  yards  ;  and  the  expense  of  the  work  is  estimated  at  44,1?8/. 

Crossing  the  river  we  continued  our  journey  along  its  eastern  shore  towards  the  Great 
Orme's  Head,  where  we  had  been  promised  a  sight  of  some  very  grand  scenery.  About 
two  miles  down  the  river  is  Diganwy  Castle,  the  seat  of  Lord  Selkirk,  who  usually  passes 
a  month  or  two  of  his  summer  there,  and  with  a  truly  liberal  spirit  supports  the  character 
of  Welsh  hospitality.  His  lordship's  house  is  called  after  an  ancient  castle  which  occupied 
two  points  of  a  curiously  serrated  hill  at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore.  At  what  period 
a  fortress  was  first  founded  here  is  not  known,  but  Diganwy  is  often  mentioned  as  the 
scene  of  action  in  the  long  protracted  struggle  between  England  and  Wales.  In  the  year 
1211,  King  John  lay  encamped  under  it  for  some  time  with  a  great  unwieldy  army,  for 
which  he  could  never  find  an  opportunity  to  act,  though  he  waited  for  it  till  his  men  were 
perishing  around  him  with  hunger.  The  Welsh  wisely  avoided  a  general  action,  but 
occasionally  descending  from  their  holds  in  the  mountains,  harassed  him  by  desultory 
attacks  ;  cutting  offhis  supplies  of  provisions,  and  finally  reducing  him  to  such  an  extremity, 
that  he  was  compelled  to  make  a  disgraceful  retreat,  leaving  the  country  covered  with  his 
dead.  His  successor,  Henry  the  Third,  suffered  a  reverse  equally  disastrous  on  the  same 
spot,  lying  passive  and  impotent  with  an  army  far  superior  in  numbers  to  that  of  the 
enemy,  till,  to  avoid  being  starved  in  his  quarters,  he  was  obliged  to  retreat.  An  officer 
of  rank  attached  to  his  army  gives,  in  a  letter  to  his  friends,  the  following  dolorous  account 
of  his  sufferings  during  the  term  of  this  miserable  encampment.  "  The  king  with  his 
armie  lieth  at  Gannock  (Diganwy)  fortifieing  of  that  strong  castell,  and  we  lie  in  our  tents 

thereby, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  55 

thereby,  watching,  fasting,  praying,  and  freezing  with  cold.  We  watch  for  feare  of  the 
Welshmen,  who  are  wont  to  invade  and  come  upon  us  in  the  night  time :  we  fast  for  want 
of  meat,  for  the  halfpenny  loaf  is  worth  fivepence ;  we  praie  to  God  to  send  us  home 
again  speedilie ;  and  we  starve  for  cold,  wanting  our  winter  garments,  and  having  no 
more  hut  a  thin  linen  cloth  betwixt  us  and  the  wind  *." 

Some  traces  of  the  castle  are  still  visible,  but  they  are  not  sufficient  to  give  any  idea 
of  its  form  and  extent.  The  sides  of  the  two  rocks  on  which  it  stood  are  very  precipitous, 
and  taper  upwards,  leaving  very  limited  surfaces  on  their  summits,  so  that  the  building 
could  not  have  been  of  any  great  dimensions,  but  its  position  was  exceedingly  strong. 

At  a  short  distance  from  hence  we  entered  upon  the  flat  isthmus  which  connects  the 
lofty  peninsula  of  Llandudno  with  the  main  land.  In  the  time  of  Leland,  this  tract  was 
often  overflowed  by  the  sea,  and  had  a  causeway  raised  upon  it  for  passengers;  but  the 
accumulations  of  sand  brought  down  by  the  Conway  and  thrown  up  in  banks  around  it, 
have  long  since  invested  it  with  all  the  privileges  of  terra  firma,  and  it  now  yields  excellent 
corn  and  grass.  The  vast  promontory  that  bounds  it,  a  disconnected  mountain  thrust 
out  into  the  sea,  has  a  most  striking  effect  from  every  point  of  approach.  On  its  east  side 
is  the  little  village  of  Llandudno,  rude  and  romantic,  lying  at  the  foot  of  a  precipitous  hill, 
roughened  with  huge  masses  of  grey  rock,  and  sparingly  sprinkled  witli  coppice  wood. 
Here  we  left  our  horses,  as  not  safe  companions  among  the  rocks  and  precipices  that  we 
were  about  to  explore,  and  proceeding  by  the  shore  along  the  south  side  of  the  promontory, 
came  to  Gogarth,  the  ruins  of  a  monastery,  which  was  annexed  to  the  abbey  of  Conway. 
Fame  had  attracted  us  hither  to  see  a  picturesque  ruin,  but  fame  delights  in  amplification, 
and  we  gained  nothing  by  our  visit,  but  a  new  proof  of  the  utter  lawlessness  of  its  reports. 
Enough  of  the  edifice  remains  to  shew  that  it  was  large  and  strongly  built,  but  we  could 
discover  nothing  more  about  it.  It  stands  close  to  the  shore,  and  some  parts  of  it  have 
been  washed  down  by  the  sea. 

The  whole  southern  side  of  the  peninsula  is  bordered  by  a  narrow  stripe  of  flat  land, 
the  only  remnant  left  of  a  great  plain  which,  according  to  tradition,  once  filled  up  the 
space  between  this  promontory  and  the  island  of  Priestholm.  This  narrow  tract  is 
extremely  fertile,  and  was  now  covered  with  corn,  whose  rich  golden  colour  was  finely 
contrasted  with  the  rude  front  of  the  precipice  which  rises  above  it  to  the  height  of  four 
hundred  feet.  The  whole  mountain  consists  of  limestone,  which,  on  this  southern  face, 
breaks  out  in  long  lines  of  rock  like  walls,  which,  ranged  one  above  the  other,  have  the 
appearance  of  a  fortification.  We  made  our  way  to  the  summit  from  this  side,  by  a  heart- 
bursting  path  cut  in  traverses  up  the  precipice,  almost  scorched  to  death  with  the  sun, 
whose  rays,  reflected  from  the  white  limestone,  came  over  us  in  blasts  of  heat  that  were 

*  Powel,  p.  224. 

scarcely 


56  VOYAGE    UOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

scarcely  supportable.  We  did  not  find  a  paradise  at  the  top  to  recompense  us  for  this 
purgatorial  experiment,  and  might  probably  have  hesitated  to  go  through  it  again,  even 
with  the  certainty  of  such  a  reward. 

The  peninsula  is  rather  more  than  two  miles  long,  and  not  quite  one  broad,  bleak, 
naked,  and  unenclosed,  but  covered  with  a  good  turf,  which  yields  excellent  herbage  for 
sheep.  The  surface  of  the  summit  is  deeply  waved  by  ridges  and  hollows,  and  rises  at  its 
highest  point  to  the  height  of  about  seven  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Our 
views  from  this  eminence  were  inexpressibly  fine.  To  the  south  were  seen  the  windings 
of  the  Conway,  the  numerous  towers  of  its  town  and  castle,  and  in  the  distance  the  spiring 
summits  of  a  chain  of  mountains.  To  the  west  lay  the  lovely  bay  of  Beaumaris,  and  a 
long  extent  of  the  deeply  indented  coast  of  Anglesey ;  and  to  the  north  was  the  boundless 
expanse  of  the  ocean. 

We  proceeded  to  the  extreme  point  of  the  promontory,  which  opposes  a  most  awful 
front  to  the  sea,  and  very  singularly  broken.  The  face  of  the  cliff',  which  is  of  solid  rock, 
appears  to  have  been  violently  rent  asunder ;  and  in  front  of  the  chasm  a  sloping  bank 
shelves  down  to  the  sea  with  a  very  rapid  descent,  perhaps  at  an  angle  of  sixty  with  the 
plane  of  the  horizon.  This  bank  is  covered  with  a  considerable  depth  of  earth,  and  spread 
with  short  russet  grass.  On  each  side  of  it  is  a  tremendous  precipice,  striking  to  the  sea 
in  three  or  four  vast  steps  of  rock,  the  face  of  each  step  smooth  and  quite  perpendicular, 
and  the  highest  at  least  six  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  On  the  summit  of 
each  of  these  grand  terraces,  excepting  the  lowest,  there  is  a  level  space  broad  enough  to 
walk  upon  with  security,  where,  without  more  alarm  than  is  sufficient  to  give  interest  to 
the  situation,  you  may  look  about  upon  the  great  expanse  of  the  ocean.  The  summit  of 
the  last  step,  which  is  about  three  hundred  feet  perpendicular,  is  only  a  narrow  ledge,  not 
more  than  a  yard  wide,  but,  singularly  enough,  covered  with  a  fine  green  turf.  To  this 
frightful  path  some  sheep,  alarmed  at  our  voices,  had  fled  for  safety,  and  even  here 
exhibited  some  symptoms  of  alarm  about  us,  though  they  looked  down  at  the  terrible 
abyss  beneath  them  apparently  without  concern.  We  had  a  guide  with  us,  who  proposed 
to  prove  himself  not  less  fearless  than  the  sheep  by  following  their  steps ;  but  we  dissuaded 
him  from  the  enterprize,  feeling  less  interest  in  the  strength  of  his  nerves  than  the  weakness 
of  our  own. 

On  the  face  of  the  steep  bank  which  intersects  these  immense  walls  of  rock  a  zig-zag 
path  has  been  cut,  which  formerly  led  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  cliff.  Here,  we  were 
informed,  there  is  a  remarkably  pretty  cavern  in  the  rock,  furnished  with  a  table  and  seats 
of  white  marble  for  the  accommodation  of  tea  parties.  This  little  grotto  at  the  foot  of 
this  magnificent  precipice,  and  looking  out  upon  a  fine  deep  sea,  must  have  a  very  striking 
effect,  and  we  wished  very  much  to  gain  a  sight  of  it,  but  tried  without  success.  We  de- 
scended down  the  bank  to  within  about  eighty  feet  of  the  sea,  when  we  found  our  pro- 
gress 


VOYAGE  ROUND  CHEAT  BRITAIN.  57 

gress  checked  by  a  perpendicular  precipice — the  consequence  of  some  recent  fall  of  the 
rocks.  Our  view  from  hence  upwards  of  the  cliff  above  us,  its  dreadful  height,  and  the 
enormous  masses  of  solid  rock  of  which  it  is  composed,  was  perfectly  sublime. 

The  whole  northern  coast  of  the  promontory  is  not  quite  so  lofty  as  its  western  point, 
but  of  the  same  character,  the  vast  strata  of  rock  being  piled  in  a  similar  succession  of  ter- 
races, and  broken  at  intervals  by  sudden  chasms,  each  faced  with  a  green  sloping  bank. 
It  composed  altogether  the  most  extraordinary  and  romantic  piece  of  coast  scenery  that 
we  had  seen  ;  amazingly  grand  and  fantastically  varied,  the  grey  weather-beaten  rocks  al- 
ternating in  striking  contrast  with  the  smooth  verdant  banks,  which  occasionally  breaking 
the  huge  wall,  gave  us  glimpses  of  the  white  foam  of  the  sea  beating  the  shore  at  an  awful 
depth  below  us. 

In  the  breeding  season  these  cliffs  are  the  haunt  of  myriads  of  sea-birds,  principally  Guil- 
lemots and  Razor  Bills,  but  they  had  now  all  disappearedt  We  had  been  forewarned  that  we 
should  not  see  a  single  bird,  having  deferred  our  visit  to  the  14th  of  August,  the  day  after  that 
which  these  birds  invariably  select  for  their  flight  to  other  regions.  Our  reporter,  and  we 
had  no  reason  to  question  his  veracity,  declared  that  he  had  ascertained  the  fact  through 
several  successive  years  by  actual  observation,  and  was  therefore  firmly  persuaded  not  only 
that  the  birds  to  a  single  individual  all  departed  on  the  same  day,  but  that  the  day  was 
regularly  the  13th  of  August.  Our  own  experience  on  this  weighty  matter  does  not  confirm 
the  whole  of  his  statement,  deciding  only  that  no  birds  remained  after  the  fourteenth  of 
the  month,  but  not  proving  that  none  flew  away  before  the  thirteenth. 

On  our  return  along  the  north  coast  our  attention  was  arrested  by  a  structure  which, 
on  a  very  near  examination,  we  discovered  to  be  a  church,  standing  in  a  most  cheerless 
situation ;  the  only  building  in  the  whole  of  this  wild  waste.  It  is  in  the  artless  style  of 
ordinary  Welsh  churches,  resembling  a  long  white-washed  barn.  A  small  window  at  one 
extremity  throws  a  feeble  light  upon  the  pulpit  standing  near  it,  but  every  other  part  of 
the  interior  is  as  dark  as  a  dungeon.  On  a  tablet  in  the  wall,  with  an  angel's  head  and 
wings  over  it,  is  seen  in  unequivocal  characters — "  Roger  Williams,  his  seat;"  the  only 
inscription  that  I  noticed. 

From  hence  we  were  conducted  to  the  top  of  a  hill,  called  Dinas,  at  the  east  end  of  the 
promontory,  to  look  at  a  famous  rocking-stone,  known  by  the  name  of  Cryd  Tudno, 
St.  Tudno's  cradle  :  it  was  of  enormous  size,  we  had  heard;  but  again  Fame  proved  untrue, 
representing  the  object  of  our  curiosity  as  four  times  larger  than  we  actually  found  it. 
But  this  was  not  all  that  we  had  to  complain  of:  some  bungling  experimentalists,  in  their 
ardour  to  discover  the  principle  of  motion  in  the  stone,  had  altered  its  position,  and 
rendered  it  almost  immoveable.  This  Dinas  was  one  of  the  rude  hill-forts  of  the  ancient 
Britons,  and  some  obscure  traces  of  the  works  are  still  to  be  seen,  though  I  know  not  that 
to  an  inexperienced  eye,  or  a  judgment  unprepared  by  previous  report,  they  would  appear 
to  bear  any  marks  of  man's  ingenuity.  I  think,  however,  that  I  made  out  here  and  there 

VOL.  n.  i  something 


58  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

something  like  round  walls,  well  known  to  the  learned  as  the  mystic  circles  of  the  Druids, 
but  which  the  vulgar  here  call  Irishmen's  houses,  it  being  certain  that  those  adventurous 
pirates,  in  days  of  old,  encouraged  by  the  facility  of  the  voyage,  made  frequent  attacks 
upon  this  coast  of  Wales.  There  can  be  no  reason,  then,  for  denying  that  the  houses 
belonged  to  the  Irishmen  : — But  were  they  houses  ?  This  is  really  more  than  I  can  presume 
to  say. 

We  now  descended  into  the  plain,  and  continued  our  journey  along  the  shore  across 
the  pretty  bay  of  Llandudno,  bounded  at  its  eastern  point  by  the  Little  Orme's  Head,  a 
bold  and  lofty  cape,  which  we  might  have  paused  to  tremble  at  a  little,  had  we  not  so  lately 
come  from  its  more  formidable  namesake  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the  bay.  Rounding 
this  point,  an  expanded  prospect  opened  before  us,  unobstructed  by  rocks  and  precipices, — 
a  capacious  bay  bounded  by  a  low  shore,  the  land  rising  gradually  from  it,  and  richly  spread 
with  ripened  corn.  We  were  now  to  take  our  leave  altogether  of  the  Welsh  mountains, 
and  had  quite  done  with  climbing,  and  scrambling,  and  jumping,  with  crags  and  bogs,  and 
all  the  accidents  of  Alpine  journeys.  We  were  certainly  to  be  no  gainers  in  the  pictu- 
resque by  the  change  of  scene  that  was  before  us;  but  after  travelling  so  far  in  a  wild  and 
rugged  region  interspersed  only  with  spots  and  patches  of  verdure  and  fruitfulness,  there 
was  a  great  charm  in  the  first  sight  of  a  wide  extent  of  country  blessed  with  an  uniform 
fertility,  and  yielding  in  every  part  of  it  something  for  the  use  and  enjoyment  of  man- 
After  passing  for  a  few  miles  through  a  country  recommended  by  such  cheerful  circum- 
stances of  interest,  we  arrived  at  the  foot  of  a  long  hill  which  juts  out  into  the  sea,  and 
forms  the  promontory  of  Penmaen  Rhos.  From  its  summit  we  had  a  lovely  view  over  the 
fertile  tract  that  we  had  just  passed.  The  distance  was  marked  by  a  range  of  hills  well 
covered  with  wood,  and  girding  in  the  figure  of  a  crescent  a  plain  which  was  all  a  garden, 
and  terminated  in  a  wide  bay  filled  with  a  smooth  and  brilliant  sea.  Nothing  could  be 
more  elegant  than  every  feature  of  the  prospect,  and  nothing  more  Avarm  and  various  than 
its  colouring,  heightened  as  it  was  by  the  glow  of  the  sun,  which  was  sinking  low  in  the  west, 
and  shed  over  all  a  rich  and  yellow  light.  Opposite  to  us,  in  the  remote  distance,  were  seen 
the  tops  of  the  Caernarvon  mountains ;  but  they  were  mellowed  by  a  soft  blue  tint,  and 
rather  improved  than  disturbed  the  harmony  of  this  graceful  and  placid  landscape. 

Continuing  our  journey  for  a  few  miles  further,  still  through  a  fertile  and  pleasing 
country,  we  arrived  at  the  village  of  Abergeleu,  once  noted  only  for  the  large  cattle-fairs 
held  at  it,  but  now  distinguished  also  as  a  bathing-place ;  its  street  of  ancient  hovels  and 
public-houses,  abodes  such  as  drovers  love,  having  been  lately  flanked  by  a  good  inn  and 
a  few  decent  lodging-houses.  It  stands  on  the  skirts  of  a  large  tract  of  level  land,  called 
Rhuddlan  Marsh,  supposed  to  have  been  formerly  of  much  greater  extent,  and  reduced  by 
the  depredations  of  the  sea.  The  advance  of  the  sea  is  attested  by  an  epitaph  in  the 
churchyard  of  the  village,  which  has  neither  name  nor  date,  but  simply  records,  that  in  the 
churchyard  lies  a  man  who  lived  three  miles  to  the  northward  of  it;  and  if  the  assertion 

be 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN*.  59 

be  true,  the  sea  must  have  advanced  two  miles  upon  the  land.  Objections  may  be  raised 
to  this  loose  record,  given  perhaps  on  the  evidence  of  an  old  man  anxious  to  report  some- 
thing extraordinary,  and  not  careful  to  measure  his  miles  with  precision;  but  that  the  sea 
has  gained  very  considerably  upon  the  land  is  proved  by  the  appearance  of  a  long  extent  of 
clayey  soil,  rilled  with  the  trunks  of  oak  trees,  stretching  out  as  far  as  low-water  mark.  The 
land  for  many  leagues  to  the  eastward  of  Abergeleu  is  bordered  by  a  very  low  shore,  but  is 
apparently,  in  some  degree,  secured  against  further  injury  by  banks  of  sand  and  a  bed  of 
beach.  The  marsh  is  a  dreary  naked  tract,  inclosed,  and  producing  some  corn,  but  generally 
laid  out  in  pasture,  brown  and  bare,  and  without  a  tree  or  a  bush  to  relieve  the  uniform 
flatness  of  the  surface.  In  the  year  795,  this  plain  was  the  scene  of  a  dreadful  battle  be- 
tween the  Saxons  and  the  Welsh,  which  ended  in  the  total  rout  of  the  latter,  with  the  loss  of 
their  Prince  Caradoc.  The  pretty  plaintive  Welsh  air,  known  b}'  the  name  of  Morfa 
Rhuddlan,  is  supposed  to  have  been  composed  as  a  lament  for  the  heroes  who  perished  in 
this  disastrous  fight. 

From  Abergeleu  we  proceeded  to  Rhuddlan,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  small  river 
Clwyd,  a  dirty  ragged  town,  combining  in  one  street  all  the  abominations  that  I  have 
recorded  of  all  the  worst  towns  in  Wales.  It  is  rendered  of  some  consideration,  however, 
in  the  eyes  of  a  traveller,  by  the  remains  of  a  castle,  though  positively  we  had  become  so 
familiar  with  towers  and  bastions,  that  nothing  less  than  the  ardour  of  my  uncle  Toby 
could  have  made  us  regard  them  now  with  any  lively  interest.  Rhuddlan  was  fortified 
at  an  early  period,  and  being  near  the  frontier  of  the  kingdom,  was  considered  a  post  of 
equal  importance  to  the  Welsh  and  their  invaders,  and  was  knocked  down  and  rebuilt 
somewhat  oftener  than  is  worth  the  telling,  as  the  various  fortune  of  war  bandied  it  from 
one  restless  possessor  to  another.  It  was  last  enlarged  and  strengthened  by  Edward  the 
First,  who  made  Rhuddlan  his  general  magazine  of  arms  and  provisions  for  the  army 
which  he  had  collected  for  the  conquest  of  Wales.  During  the  short  struggle  that  was 
made  to  oppose  him,  this  castle  was  attacked  by  David,  the  brother  of  Prince  Llewelyn, 
but  without  success ;  and  it  was  permitted  to  stand  uninjured  till  the  reign  of  Charles 
the  First,  when  it  was  taken  by  General  Mytton,  and  by  him  dismantled.  At  the  con- 
clusion of  his  last  campaign  in  this  country,  Edward  the  First  held  a  parliament  here,  to 
take  into  consideration  the  best  means  of  reclaiming  his  new  subjects,  and  introducing 
among  them  the  authority  of  regular  government.  In  this  council  was  framed  the  statute 
of  Rhuddlan,  in  which  were  included  many  excellent  provisions  for  the  regulation  of  the 
country ;  but  from  the  evil  administration  of  the  officers  appointed  to  enforce  them,  and 
the  stubborn  turbulence  of  the  people,  they  proved  altogether  ineffectual,  and  Wales 
remained,  for  some  centuries  after  its  conquest  by  England,  in  a  state  of  barbarous  riot 
and  confusion. 

The  castle  was  surrounded  with  a  ditch  faced  with  stone,  and  towards  the  river  was 
defended  by  a  strong  and  bfty  wall  flanked  by  three  square  towers :  one  of  these  is  still 

i  2  standing, 


60  VOVAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

standing,  and  tolerably  entire ;  the  others  are  overthrown,  and  lie  in  awful  heaps  of  ruin. 
The  body  of  the  building  is  a  square,  with  a  double  tower  at  the  east  and  west  corners, 
and  a  single  one  at  each  of  the  others.  There  are  two  entrances,  one  between  each  of  the 
double  towers,  which  were  defended  by  portcullises.  The  front  facing  the  river  is  ex- 
ternally well  preserved,  but  the  other  parts  are  very  much  injured,  though  the  whole 
structure  still  retains  much  of  its  ancient  majesty,  and,  with  its  weather-worn  walls  hung 
with  ivy  and  broken  by  huge  chasms  which  discover  their  enormous  thickness,  composes  a 
very  grand  and  picturesque  ruin. 

From  the  top  of  one  of  the  towers  we  had  a  partial  view  of  the  celebrated  vale  of 
Clwyd,  which  here  opens  into  Rhuddlan  Marsh.  It  is  looked  upon  as  quite  the  Eden  of 
Wales,  and  has  been  supposed  to  put  our  valleys  of  England  entirely  out  of  countenance. 
A  tourist,  well  acquainted  with  the  scenery  of  both  countries,  has  said  of  the  vale  of 
Clwyd,  "  Cambria  here  lays  aside  her  majestic  air,  and  condescends  to  assume  a  gentler 
form,  in  order  to  render  less  violent  her  approaching  union  with  her  English  neighbour.  It 
were  to  be  wished  she  had  acted  with  more  moderation,  and  not  outshone  it  at  the  rate 
the  most  partial  Saxon  must  allow  it  to  have  done  *."  I  saw  but  a  limited  portion  of  this 
superlative  region,  and  was  not  particularly  struck  with  it,  though  I  am  not  aware  that  my 
Saxon  blood  gave  the  lightest  bias  to  my  judgment  and  feeling.  Other  tourists  have 
written  (but  they  were  Saxons)  that  the  tract  in  question,  though  possessing  many  charms, 
is  somewhat  too  trim  and  uniform,  and  that  an  artist  might  complain  of  it,  that  it  is  rather 
dressed  out  in  the  formal  modes  of  good  husbandry,  than  the  graces  of  picturesque  beauty. 
All  accounts  at  least  agree  that  it  is  exuberantly  fertile ;  and  from  many  points  of  view, 
from  whence  a  great  extent  of  it  may  be  seen,  exhibits  a  very  exhilarating  scene, — a  land 
teeming  with  abundance,  and  enlivened  by  a  numerous  and  thriving  population.  It  is  stated 
to  be  more  than  twenty  miles  in  length,  and  to  vary  from  three  to  five  miles  in  breadth. 
It  is  bounded  on  each  side  by  a  range  of  low  hills,  and  is  watered  by  the  river  Clwyd, 
though  very  scantily,  for  the  river  is  little  more  than  a  brook,  and  is  quite  lost  in  the  wide 
flat  through  which  it  winds.  At  Rhuddlan,  two  miles  from  its  junction  with  the  sea,  it 
expands  a  little,  and  becomes  navigable  for  vessels  of  a  hundred  tons. 

On  leaving  this  place  we  turned  to  the  sea,  and  continued  our  journey  along  the  shore, 
having  a  dreary  waste  of  sand  to  our  left,  and  a  barren  moor  to  our  right.  Nothing 
occurred  to  relieve  the  dulness  of  our  way  till  we  arrived  at  the  point  of  Air,  the  farthest 
projection  of  the  marsh  into  the  sea.  Here  there  is  a  lighthouse,  which  has  two  windows 
in  the  light-room,  one  shewing  a  light  to  the  eastward  into  the  river  Dee,  and  the  other 
pointing  to  the  W.  N.  W.  as  a  guide  over  Chester  Bar.  The  navigation  of  the  Dee,  and 
of  the  channel  in  every  line  of  approach  to  it,  is  exceedingly  intricate  and  dangerous. 
Vessels  sailing  to  it  from  the  westward  pass  over  Chester  Bar  through  a  narrow  channel 

*  Pennant's  Tour  in  Wales,  vol.  ii.  p.  29. 


The  Light-house  on  Point  of  Air,  Flintshire 


View  near  Hoyle-lake,  Cheshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  6l 

lying  between  the  land  and  the  Hoyle  Sands,  a  long  bank  running  parallel  with  the  shore 
for  an  extent  of  ten  or  twelve  miles,  and  lying  directly  across  the  rnouth  of  the  river.  This 
is  a  most  formidable  obstruction  to  vessels  ;  but  if  it  interrupt  the  free  use  of  the  sea,  it 
acts  as  a  serviceable  barrier  in  defence  of  the  land,  which  has  already  very  evidently  been 
greatly  encroached  upon.  The  Hoyle  Sands,  now  nearly  two  miles  from  the  shore,  are 
not  unreasonably  supposed  to  have  been  at  no  very  remote  period  a  part  of  the  land ;  and 
there  is  a  tradition  fresh  in  this  part  of  the  world,  which  boldly  declares  that  the  marsh, 
bordering  the  shore  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Dee,  formerly  extended  so  far  to  the  east- 
ward, that  people  standing  on  the 'Welsh  coast  of  the  river  could  converse  with  others  on 
the  opposite  bank.  The  channel  is  now  at  least  five  miles  across,  but  at  half  ebb,  except 
in  the  bed  of  the  river,  it  is  quite  dry.  Whether  these  exact  limitations  of  the  mischief  are 
quite  correct  is  doubtful;  but  it  is  certain  that  the  land  on  this  coast  has  suffered  largely 
from  the  ravages  of  the  sea,  and  the  consequence  has  been  the  extension  of  those 
numerous  banks  along  the  shore  which  so  seriously  obstruct  the  facility  of  access  to  the 
Dee  and  the  Mersey. 

As  we  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  lighthouse  we  were  much  struck  with  the  dreary  aspect 
of  this  dismal  shore,  and  we  saw  it  under  circumstances  peculiar!  jr  favourable  to  its  drea- 
riness. The  sea  had  ebbed  far  out,  leaving  exposed  a  desert  of  sand,  at  least  a  mile  in 
breadth,  and  extending  in  length  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  Over  this  melancholy  waste 
a  low  cloud  of  loose  sand,  forced  up  by  a  strong  wind,  was  driving  to  the  land,  spreading 
destruction  before  it ;  and  on  the  banks  at  sea  were  seen  and  heard  long  lines  of  breakers. 
On  the  sands  were  strewed  about  pieces  of  wreck  and  heaps  of  stranded  fish ;  and  not  far 
from  us  lay  the  whitened  skeleton  of  a  horse,  which  looked  a  huge  strange  thing,  and  had 
a  good  effect  in  this  picture  of  desolation.  An  iron-bound  coast,  with  the  horrors  of  its 
gulfs  and  precipices,  has  more  of  grandeur  and  magnificence,  but  never  excited  in  our 
minds  a  stronger  impression  of  the  gloomy  and  terrible  than  this  wild,  exposed,  and 
cheerless  flat. 

After  proceeding  about  two  miles  further  east,  we  arrived  at  the  broad  estuary  of  the 
Dee,  now  a  plain  of  mud.  We  were  here  thrown  into  a  momentary  puzzle  about  our 
mode  of  progress,  finding,  contrary  to  the  positive  assurance  of  our  guide,  that  there  was 
no  road  along  the  shore  within  the  estuary,  and  that  had  we  attempted  a  pass  in  that  line, 
we  should  undoubtedly  have  been  consigned  to  a  muddy  grave.  There  would  have  been 
something  very  preposterous  and  inexcusable  in  such  a  destiny,  and  we  were  careful  not  to 
advance  nearer  to  it  than  up  to  the  knees.  We  could  not  escape  to  the  road  over  the 
marsh,  for  it  is  here  an  open  swamp,  and  had  the  sea  been  advancing,  we  might  have  been 
reduced  to  a  situation  of  no  insignificant  peril,  considering  that  we  are  but  home  travellers. 
Fortunately,  however,  we  were  here  at  a  most  propitious  hour  of  the  tide,  which  allowed 
us  deliberately  to  retrace  our  steps  to  the  lighthouse,  from  whence  we  made  our  way  over 
a  part  of  the  marsh  lately  inclosed,  and  so  effected  our  retreat  to  the  road.  Even  here, 

when 


62  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

when  we  had  passed  beyond  the  protection  of  the  inclosures,  we  were  obliged  to  proceed 
with  some  caution  over  a  track  diversified  by  heaps  of  loose  stones  and  pits  of  water,  and 
occasionally  of  mud  left  by  the  sea,  which,  at  high  water  in  spring  tides,  flows  over  the 
road.  Immediately  to  our  right  our  view  was  bounded  by  a  high  rocky  bank,  a  firm 
barrier  against  the  further  depredations  of  the  sea.  This  bank,  broken  by  many  small 
bays  and  projections,  and  shaded  with  wood,  forms  a  pretty  boundary  to  the  water,  when 
it  pleases  the  water  to  appear;  but  there  was  none  now  visible,  except  here  and  there  in  a 
pool  or  a  gutter  on  a  dull  expanse  of  mud.  We  splashed  and  stumbled  along  for  about  three 
miles,  when  the  marsh  appeared  again  to  our  left,  covered  with  a  short  bright  grass,  which, 
though  occasionally  overflowed  by  the  sea,  is  very  willingly  eaten  by  sheep,  and  renders 
them  very  fit  to  be  eaten.  Here  our  road  became  firm,  dry,  and  infested  by  turnpikes, 
and  we  hurried  on,  without  any  more  extravagant  causes  of  complaint  or  admiration,  till 
we  found  ourselves  at  rest  for  the  day  in  a  comfortable  inn  at  Holywell. 

This  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  opulent  towns  of  Wales,  raised  within  a  century 
from  a  village  of  a  few  huts,  by  the  introduction  of  manufactures.  It  is  irregular,  and 
inconveniently  situated  on  the  sides  of  a  steep  hill ;  but  the  streets  are  spacious,  and  the 
houses  generally  very  respectable :  it  is  crowded  with  people,  and  altogether  wears  the 
appearance  of  a  busy  thriving  place.  But  its  leading  object  of  curiosity  to  strangers  is  its 
celebrated  well,  which,  by  its  miraculous  powers,  gave  to  the  town  in  former  times  all  its 
fame  and  dignity,  and  which  contributes  very  materially  to  the  support  of  its  present  im- 
portance, by  supplying  the  principle  of  motion  to  the  machinery  of  its  numerous  and  various 
manufactories.  The  spring  rises  from  a  rock  at  the  bottom  of  a  steep  hill,  and  is  covered 
with  an  elegant  gothic  shrine  ornamented  with  a  profusion  of  sculpture.  The  water  boils  up 
with  amazing  force,  and  is  first  received  into  a  polygonal  well  within  the  shrine,  from 
whence  it  flows  into  a  large  bath  in  the  open  air,  which  once  washed  away  the  sins  and  sor-. 
rows  of  as  many  as  had  faith  enough  to  make  a  trial  of  its  waters,  but  had  now,  I  could 
perceive,  a  coat  of  mud  at  the  bottom,  of  some  months'  growth,  which  had  evidently  never 
been  disturbed  by  the  foot  of  a  believer.  A  few  years  ago  there  were  some  devotees  to  be 
found  who  had  not  learned  to  despise  the  powers  of  these  consecrated  waters.  Mr.  Pen- 
nant states,  "  In  the  summer,  still  a  few  are  to  be  seen  in  the  water  in  deep  devotion  up  to 
their  chins  for  hours,  sending  up  their  prayers,  or  performing  a  number  of  evolutions  round 
the  polygonal  well ;  or  threading  the  arch  between  well  and  well  a  prescribed  number  of 
times.  Few  people  of  rank  at  present  honour  the  fountain  with  their  presence.  A  crowned 
head  in  the  seventeenth  century  dignified  the  place  with  a  visit.  The  prince  who  lost  three 
kingdoms  for  a  mass,  payed  his  respects  on  August  29,  1686,  to  our  saint,  and  received 
as  a  reward,  a  present  of  the  very  shift  in  which  his  great  grandmother,  Mary  Stuart,  lost 
her  head  *." 

*  Tour  in  Wales,  vol.  i.  p.  51. 

they 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  O3 

A  fe\v  crutches,  the  offerings  of  restored  cripples,  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  shrine,  but 
they  have  been  there  so  long,  I  believe,  that  they  are  now  not  regarded  with  any  degree  of 
wonder,  and  there  are  lame  people  in  this  very  town  who  resolutely  keep  their  crutches 
under  their  arms.  Two  ancient  maidens  attend  at  the  well  to  distribute  the  precious 
draught,  and  explain  its  virtues  to  strangers,  which  they  do  with  great  seriousness  and 
devoutness;  though  the  solemnity  of  the  shrine  was  shockingly  scandalized,  when  we  were 
there,  by  tbe  jarring  tongues  and  pails  of  a  profane  mob  of  cooks  and  scullions,  who  dipped 
their  unpurged  hands  into  the  well,  dreaming  as  little  of  miracles  as  though  St.  Wenefrede 
had  never  been. 

This  spring  had  a  very  extraordinary  origin,  connected  too  with  a  most  wonderful  event 
in  the  life  of  the  illustrious  saint  who  presides  over  it.  Wenefrede,  who  lived  in  the  seventh 
century,  was  born  of  noble  parents,  and  was  a  lady  of  rare  endowments  and  singular 
beauty.  She  resided  here  under  the  protection  of  her  uncle,  St.  Beuno,  till  the  peace  and 
happiness  of  her  retirement  were  interrupted  by  the  invasion  of  a  lawless  lover  of  high 
rank,  called  Cradocus.  This  intemperate  man  might  perhaps  have  been  forgiven  for 
loving  a  lady  of  such  attractions  as  the  fair  Wenefrede,  but  he  had  the  unpardonable 
boldness  to  declare  his  passion  to  her,  and  shock  her  with  proposals  for  its  gratification. 
The  indignant  virgin,  at  the  first  hint  of  such  an  outrage,  made  a  violent  attempt  to  escape  ; 
but  the  ruffian  pursued  her,  and,  in  a  transport  of  rage  and  disappointment,  cut  off  her 
head.  He  had  scarcely  struck  the  blow  when  he  fell  dead  ;  whether  the  earth  opened  to 
receive  him,  or  the  devil,  by  some  unseen  slight,  got  hold  of  him,  is  not  quite  clear,  according 
to  the  legend  ;  but  it  is  altogether  certain  that  he  never  made  his  appearance  again  in  this 
world  alive  or  dead.  In  the  mean  time  Wenefrede's  head  proceeded  down  the  hill  and 
stopped  at  the  bottom,  when,  from  the  spot,  the  spring  instantly  gushed  out  clear  and 
copious  as  we  now  behold  it.  A  moss,  fragrant  with  perfume,  lined  its  sides,  and  the  rock 
sprinkled  with  blood  ever  after  retained  the  stains. 

"  The  lifeless  tears  shee  shed,  into  a  fountaine  turne, 

And,  that  for  her  alone,  the  water  should  not  runtime, 

The  pure  vei  million  blood  that  issued  from  her  veines 

Unto  this  very  day  the  pearly  gravel  staines ; 

As  erst  the  white  and  red  were  mixed  in  her  cheeke, 

And  that  one  part  of  her  might  be  the  other  like, 

Her  haire  was  turned  to  mosse,  whose  sweetnesse  doth  declare, 

In  liveliness  of  youth  the  natural  sweets  she  bare*." 

There  are  who  venture  to  affirm  that  this  scented  moss,  which  still  grows  in  abundance 
on  the  sides  of  the  well,  was  not  unknown  to  Linnaus,  and  that  it  is  frequently  found  in 
many  other  springs  in  our  own  country.  They  assert,  too,  that  the  stains  on  the  rock  are 

*  Drayton's  Poly-Olbion. 

not 


64 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 


not  blood,  but  purely  vegetable  matter.     Of  this,  however,  there  is  nothing  hinted  in  the 
legend. 

I  have  said  that  St.  Beuno  was  the  protector  of  Wenefrede,  and  though,  as  it  may  be 
supposed,  he  was  too  old  and  feeble  to  interpose  with  effect  in  the  first  tumult  of  this 
sudden  tragedy,  yet  he  came  forward  in  time  to  be  of  very  signal  service.  When  Cradocus 
disappeared,  this  provident  saint  took  his  way  after  the  restless  head  of  his  unfortunate 
relative;  and  finding  it  at  the  spring,  carried  it  back  to  the  body  which  it  had  deserted,  and 
as  nicely  as  he  could,  placed  it  where  it  ought  to  be  :  the  dissevered  parts  immediately  and 
closely  united  again  like  old  friends,  and  Wenefrede  breathed  again,  retaining  no  mark  of 
her  decapitation,  except  a  small  white  line  round  the  neck.  She  survived  this  astonishing 
adventure  fifteen  years,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  her  life,  during  this-  interval,  was  dis- 
tinguished by  any  extraordinary  circumstances.  She  died  at  Gwytherin,  in  Denbighshire, 
and  was  buried  there,  but  was  afterwards  removed  to  the  Abbey  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul 
at  Shrewsbury,  where  her  shrine  became  the  scene  of  an  infinity  of  miracles. 

Though  the  spring  has  lost  the  reputed  charm  which  made  it  a  panacea  for  all  kinds 
of  disease  and  affliction,  it  is  still  turned  to  uses  which  might  atone  for  the  loss  of  St. 
Wenefrede's  head,  even  had  it  not  been  fated  to  resume  its  station.  It  discharges  twenty- 
one  tons  of  water  in  a  minute,  and  rushes  with  great  impetuosity  through  a  narrow  valley, 
about  a  mile  in  length,  when  it  discharges  itself  into  the  estuary  of  the  Dee.  The  banks 
nearly  in  its  whole  course  are  crowded  with  factories,  many  for  the  manufacture  of  copper 
and  brass,  and  several  cotton-mills  and  corn-mills,  the  works  of  all  of  which  are  set  in 
motion  by  the  single  power  of  this  valuable  stream.  The  cotton  spun  in  these  mills  is 
esteemed  for  its  uniform  texture  and  quality,  produced  by  the  regular  and  unvarying  force 
with  which  the  water  acts  upon  the  machinery.  The  course  of  the  stream  is  so  short,  that 
no  diminution  ever  occurs  in  the  quantity  of  water;  and  the  rapidity  of  the  current  keeps 
it. from  freezing  in  the  severest  winters. 

We  proceeded  from  Holy  well  five  or  six  miles  higher  up  the  Dee  to  Flint,  with  none 
but  disagreeable  objects  to  remark  by  the  way.  Our  road  skirted  the  marsh,  and  was 
flanked  on  each  side  by  smelting-hbuses,  vomiting  forth  clouds  of  suffocating  smoke,  and 
sullying  the  whole  face  of  nature.  The  lead  procured  from  mines  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Holywell  is  smelted  in  these  works,  which  afford  support  to  a  numerous  population.  The 
country  was  thickly  peopled  by  villages,  but  all  of  the  same  deplorable  description,  black 
and  ragged,  and  distinguished  by  all  the  filth  arid  wretchedness  that  is  inseparable  from 
the  disgusting  modes  of  industry  in  which  the  people  are  employed. 

Flint  is  most  unpleasantly  situated,  exposed  to  the  unwholesome  damp  rising  from  a 
swamp,  and  poisoned  with  smoke  from  lead-works  in  its  neighbourhood.  The  town  has 
the  air  of  a  deserted  place,  and  of  having  once  known  better  days.  It  consists  principally 
of  one  long  street  containing  some  decent  houses,  or  houses  that  have  been  decent,  for 

they 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  65 

they  are  now  ruinous  and  neglected,  and  seem  to  be  inhabited  by  the  same  dirt-despising 
order  of  people  who  own  the  beggarly  hovels  which  interrupt  them.  The  street  is  of  good 
breadth  and  well  paved,  but  so  little  frequented  by  passengers,  that  grass  grows  between 
the  stones.  At  one  end  of  it  is  a  neat  jail,  with  an  inscription  in  front,  which  informs  us 
that  it  was  erected  in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  the  present  reign,  at  the  expense  of  the 
county,  aided  by  private  subscriptions,  in  the  place  of  a  loathsome  dungeon  which  formerly 
stood  on  the  same  ground.  We  went  over  every  part  of  the  building,  and  were  pleased  to 
observe  its  extreme  cleanliness,  and  the  admirable  attention  that  is  paid  to  the  comfort  and 
accommodation  of  the  prisoners.  The  county  sessions  were  formerly  held  here,  but  they 
have  for  some  years  been  transferred  to  Mold,  and  this  may  be  one  of  the  causes  of  the 
decline  of  the  place. 

There  are  the  remains  of  a  large  castle  here,  situated  on  a  low  rock  washed  by  the 
Dee.  The  building  is  a  square,  with  a  round  tower  at  three  of  the  corners;  and,  a  little 
detached  from  the  fourth,  a  tower  of  much  larger  dimensions  than  the  others,  called  the 
double  tower.  This  was  the  keep,  which  had  a  communication  with  the  main  building  by 
means  of  a  drawbridge.  Henry  the  Second  is  supposed  to  have  first  founded  a  fortress 
here;  but  the  present  building  was  principally  the  work  of  Edward  the  First.  In  the 
year  1332  it  was  ^ranted  by  Edward  the  Third,  together  with  other  castles,  to  Edward  the 
Black  Prince  ;  and  in  1385  was  bestowed  by  Richard  the  Second  upon  Robert  Vere,  Earl 
of  Oxford.  Fourteen  years  afterwards  it  came  into  the  possession  of  Percy,  Earl  of 
Northumberland,  who,  betraying  his  unfortunate  master,  delivered  him  up  a  prisoner  here 
to  Bolingbroke.  The  following  dramatic  account  of  the  king's  interview  in  this  castle 
with  his  powerful  enemy  is  given  by  Stowe.  "  The  next  day,  after  dinner,  the  Duke  of 
Lancaster  entered  the  castle  all  armed,  his  basenet  excepted.  King  Richard  came  down 
to  meet  him,  and  the  duke,  as  soon  as  he  saw  the  king,  fell  on  his  knees,  and  coming 
near  unto  him,  he  kneeled  a  second  time  with  his  hat  in  his  hand :  and  the  king  then  put 
off  his  hood  and  spoke  first :  '  Fair  cousin  of  Lancaster,  you  are  right  welcome.'  The 
duke,  bowing  low  to  the  ground,  answered,  '  My  Lord,  I  am  come  before  you  sent  for 
me;  the  reason  why  I  will  shew  you.  The  common  fame  among  your  people  is  such, 
that  ye  have,  for  the  space  of  twenty  or  two  and  twenty  years,  ruled  them  very  rigorously; 
but  if  it  please  our  Lord,  1  will  help  you  to  govern  better.'  The  king  answered,  '  Fair 
cousin  of  Lancaster,  sith  it  pleaseth  you,  it  pleaseth  me  well!'  The  duke  then,  with  a  high 
sharp  voice,  bade  bring  forth  the  king's  horses,  and  two  little  nagges,  not  worth  fortie  franks, 
were  brought  forth:  the  king  was  set  on  the  one  and  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  on  the  other; 
and  thus  the  duke  brought  them  from  Flint  to  Chester."* 

We  concluded  our  tour  in  Wales  at  this  place ;  for  though  we  might  have  proceeded 
up  the  Dee,  perhaps,  as  long  as  the  water  continued  brackish,  without  going  beyond  the 

*  Stowe's  Annals,  32 1 . 
VOL.  ii.  K  limits 


66  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

limits  of  a  coast  voyage,  yet  as  we  had  reason  to  believe  that  there  was  little  to  gratify 
curiosity  by  the  way,  we  declined  the  experiment.     We  had  entered  the  principality  with 
high  anticipations  of  delight  from  the  grandeur  and  beauty  of  its  scenery,  and,  upon  the 
whole,  we  had  certainly  been  amply  satisfied,  though  our  route  did  not  include  many  parts 
of  the  country,  which  have  been  decided  to  be  pre-eminently  interesting  by  the  full  chorus 
of  former  tourists.     Our  curiosity  too  had  been  somewhat  quickened  by  expectations  of 
greater  novelty  than  any  former  part  of  our  tour  had  presented  us  with,  for  Wales  had 
appeared  to  us  in  some  degree  like  a  foreign  country,  and  we  had  prepared  ourselves  for 
an  occHsional  discovery  of  something  peculiar  and  unfamiliar  in  the  manners  and  customs 
of  its  inhabitants.     These  were  rather  daring  dreams  for  two  travellers  adventuring  them- 
selves over  regions  so  near  to  home,  and  from  the  few  notices  that  I  have  made  on  this 
subject  during  our  course,  it  may  be  surmised  that  they  were  not  exactly  fulfilled.     In  fact, 
when  our  ears  had  grown  familiarized  with  hearing  people  speaking  about  us  in  a  language 
that  we  did  not  understand,  we  watched  in  vain  for  any  other  essential  peculiarities,  and 
on  arriving  at  the  border,  after  our  passage  through  the  country,  were  struck  by  not  many 
or  very  palpable  changes,  observing  only  that  the  women  began  to  wear  bonnets  instead 
of  hats,  and  did  not  so  generally  despise  shoes  and  stockings.     At  a  very  early  period  of 
our  travels,  indeed,  we  noticed  in  the  personal  appearance  of  the  people,  and  in  every  cir- 
cumstance of  their  external  condition,  some  very  broad  distinctions,  which  were  quite 
sufficient  to  assure  us  that  we  were  not  on  English  ground  ;  but  these  were  so  universal 
and  so  little  varied,  that  they  soon  ceased  to  strike  us  as  new,  and  they  certainly  never 
affected  us  as  agreeable.     Dirt,  I  am   sorry  to  say,  was  a  sign  so  widely  manifested, 
that  we  seldom  lost  sight  of  its  unseemly  face  from  one  extremity  of  the  principality  to 
the  other.     The  people,  particularly  the  women,  appeared  dirty,  and  rough  and  slovenly 
in  their  clothing ;  their  habitations  were  dirty,  and  all  the  forms  of  their  domestic  life 
odiously  dirty.     This  is  a  very  comprehensive  account,  and  many  reservations,  no  doubt, 
may  be  made  in  it,  in  favour  of  individuals  and  even  classes  of  individuals,  but  I  fear 
that  the  great  result  cannot,  by  any  fair  process,  be  very  materially  reduced.     I  have  in 
my  own  recollection  some  images  of  neatness  and  cleanliness  which  might  certainly  have 
been  recorded  on  a  fairer  page,  but  they  stand  like  insulated  spots,  and  are  not  sufficiently 
numerous  and  prominent  to  redeem  the  general  dinginess  of  the  great  national  picture 
that  I  am  drawing.     On  a  first  view  we  were  inclined  to  believe,  from  the  beggarly  and 
wretched  aspect  of  the  villages  and  their  inhabitants,  that  there  was  a  far  greater  degree 
of  poverty  in  Wales  than  in  England;  but  a  longer  course  of  observation  did  not  confirm 
this  opinion,  lor  we  noticed  the  same  external  marks  of  poverty  in  very  many  of  the  people 
who  were  obviously  not  ill  provided  with  all  the  substantial  necessaries  of  life,  and  who 
could  certainly  afford  to  be  clean. 

There  is  a  fashion  in  the  country  which  might  deceive  a  traveller  content  to  make  his 
notes  from  his  chaise  window  into  quite  opposite  conclusions  from  those  which  more  in- 
timate 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  67 

timate  enquiries  brought  home  to  our  acknowledgment.  The  cottages  are  generally 
white- washed  on  the  outsides,  and  though  in  this  guise  they  may  not  be  agreeable  to  the 
eye  of  an  artist,  they  excite  flattering  expectations  in  the  lovers  of  tidiness  and  cleanliness. 
But  oh,  the  insides !  the  floors,  the  beds,  and  all  the  living  nuisances,  chickens,  pigs,  &c. 
who  that  has  seen  these  things  can  be  pleased  with  the  white  walls  of  a  Welsh  cottage? 
Pigs  and  chickens,  I  must  confess,  are  not  invariably  met  with  as  inmates  of  the  house ; 
but  children,  whose  artless  habits  and  propensities  are  fearlessly  permitted  by  fond  mothers 
to  expatiate  freely,  with  all  the  looseness  of  nature,  will  fill  up  my  picture  with  more  than 
equal  effect.  I  may  be  thought  to  dwell  too  long  on  such  matters,  but  they  are  really 
points  of  serious  consideration  in  the  domestic  condition  of  the  people,  and  I  hold  them 
up,  not  only  as  subjects  for  ridicule,  but  remedy.  More  ale  and  better  food,  would 
perhaps  be  the  cry  of  these  poor  people  themselves,  were  it  proposed  to  them  to  form  a 
wish,  and  the  cry,  I  dare  say,  would  spring  from  right  feeling;  but  I  am  convinced  that  he 
would  confer  no  mean  benefit  upon  them,  who  could  teach  them  to  covet  mops  and 
brooms,  and  shame  them  into  some  little  respect  for  the  external  decencies  of  life.  It  is 
true  they  appear  to  be  very  ignorant  that  dirt  can  in  any  degree  interfere  with  their  com- 
forts, and,  content  with  their  habitations  as  merely  places  of  shelter,  never  dream,  when 
the  wind  and  rain  are  completely  excluded,  that  neatness  and  order  can  be  of  any  value. 
Yet  unmoved  as  they  are,  one  would  rouse  them  from  this  state  of  stupid  quiet  and  un- 
consciousness, and  give  them  a  sense  of  pains  that  are  so  readily  to  be  relieved,  and  of  en- 
joyments that  are  denied  to  none  who  desire  them.  That  is  not  the  most  enviable  state 
in  which  least  is  wanted,  or  why  was  man  ever  persuaded  to  put  on  breeches.  There  ap- 
pears to  be  something  ridiculously  solemn  in  averring  that  these  remarks  have  a  reference 
only  to  the  lower  orders  of  the  people,  and  yet  I  must  make  so  serious  a  protest,  for  there 
may  be  here  and  there  one  with  dulness  or  ill-nature  enough  to  misunderstand  or  misapply 
my  meaning. 

In  the  moral  habits  of  the  people  we  noticed  few  peculiarities  that  deserve  to  be 
described  as  essential  traits  of  national  character.  Every  one  knows  that  the  Welsh  have 
always  been  considered  as  remarkable  for  the  irritability  of  their  tempers  and  their  pride  of 
ancestry,  and  it  will  hardly  be  supposed,  that  a  man,  primed  for  observation,  could  travel 
through  the  country  without  witnessing  some  indication  of  these  characteristic  distinctions. 
But,  in  truth,  I  do  not  believe,  and  I  certainly  did  not  remark,  that  the  Welshman  is  at  all 
quick  and  fiery,  and  did  it  not  seem  too  audacious  an  opposition  to  a  commonly  received 
opinion,  should  rather  decide  that  he  was  somewhat  slow  and  phlegmatic  in  his  tempera- 
ment. It  may  be  imagined  that  we  did  not  seek  occasions  to  call  forth  his  anger,  and  that 
he  would  be  anxious  to  conceal  this  rugged  quality  of  his  nature  before  strangers ;  but  if 
such  considerations  could  enable  him  to  govern  himself  with  so  much  prudence  and  pro- 
priety, the  charge  against  him  of  any  extraordinary  irascibility  must  fall  to  the  ground. 
He  has  certainly  none  of  that  hurry  and  bustle  and  earnestness  in  his  general  manner, 

K  2  which, 


68  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

which,  as  in  the  Irish,  result  from  a  quick  and  impassioned  disposition,  but  is  an  honest, 
plain-spoken,  matter-of-fact  creature,  who  makes  no  bulls,  and  is  not  apt  to  sparkle  into 
repartee.  He  may  be  worked  into  a  passion,  no  doubt;  but  were  his  blood  always 
fermenting  under  the  excitement  of  that  extravagant  heat  that  is  imputed  to  him,  his 
ordinary  behaviour  would  not  be  quite  so  cool  and  calm. 

That  the  Welsh  are  distinguished  by  a  very  lively  pride  of  ancestry  is  more  un- 
equivocally true,  and  there  are  few  among  them  so  humble  in  their  present  condition,  as 
not  to  feel  some  little  elevation  of  spirit  reflected  from  the  crowd  that  has  gone  before 
them.  Nor  is  it  alone  the  dignity  of  his  individual  pedigree  that  swells  in  the  bosom  of 
every  one :  it  is  glorious  enough,  to  be  sure,  to  see  one's  name  carried  back  to  the  flood  by 
an  endless  chain  of  undisputed  aps;  but  the  Welshman  is  also  ennobled  by  a  feeling  more 
enlarged  and  patriotic ;  he  prides  himself  on  the  purity  of  his  British  blood  ;  he  has  no 
spice  in  him  of  Roman,  Saxon,  Dane,  or  Norman,  and  still  speaks  the  earliest  language 
that  was  heard  among  the  hills  where  he  was  born.  I  have  no  doubt  that  all  ranks  of  the 
people  are  inflamed  by  this  pride  in  the  long-preserved  integrity  of  their  race,  but  the 
more  uneducated  and  unpolished  part  of  the  community  will  very  openly  avow  it,  and 
not  hesitate  to  express  their  contempt  for  strangers  like  ourselves,  who  have  permitted 
their  blood  to  become  so  shamefully  mixed,  and  their  language  so  perverted  and  confounded, 
since  the  wanderings  of  Japhet.  One  may  smile  at  such  feelings  of  importance,  and  an 
indifferent  witness  would  not  be  disposed  to  do  any  thing  more  serious  than  smile  at  them, 
but  they  are  not  altogether  harmless,  as  they  affect  the  people  whom  they  control.  They 
tend  to  perpetuate  certain  prejudices,  and  keep  alive  an  absurd  dislike  to  innovation,  which, 
of  course,  must  sometimes  oppose  the  introduction  of  useful  knowledge  and  improvement. 
They  who  are  so  proud  of  their  ancestors,  are  obstinately  attached  to  every  thing  that 
descends  from  them,  and  will  not  readily  permit  the  venerable  line  of  their  hereditary 
practices  to  be  interrupted  by  changes,  however  plausibly  recommended.  They  will  not 
willingly  allow  that  usages  are  bad,  which  they  can  prove  to  be  old,  and  they  certainly 
will  not  be  convinced  that  they  should  be  altered.  I  cannot  pause  to  state  instances  in 
which  this  subservience  to  precedent  operates  thus  perniciously,  but  he  that  travels  through 
Wales,  and  is  studious  to  see  as  much  of  the  domestic  economy  of  the  people  as  we  saw, 
will  not  fail  to  observe  very  many  abuses  of  the  remotest  antiquity,  remnants,  I  imagine, 
of  man's  habitudes  when  he  lived  a  savage  in  the  woods,  as  religiously  preserved  as  they 
might  be  easily  reformed. 

In  the  familiar  and  every-day  occurrences  and  occupations  of  their  lives,  there  is 
nothing  in  the  manners  of  the  Welsh  to  distinguish  them  from  the  English,  but  they  have 
certain  customs  reserved  for  extraordinary  occasions,  that  are  peculiar  to  themselves, 
though  most  of  these  are  now  rapidly  sinking  into  neglect  and  disuse.  In  parts  of  North 
Wales  we  may  still  occasionally  meet  with  some  of  the  mummeries  of  the  Catholic  re- 
ligion, and  in  some  obscure  corners  may  find  a  saint  or  two,  long  grown  obsolete  in  general 

estimation, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GEEAT  BRITAIN.  69 

estimation,  still  working  miracles  amongst  a  few  staunch  devotees,  who  will  resolutely 
maintain  their  faith  as  long  as  they  have  agues,  scurvy,  and  other  maladies  to  be  cured, 
and  no  better  doctors  to  apply  to.  The  saints,  however,  have  been  nearly  all  rooted  out, 
even  in  the  remotest  recesses  of  the  country,  by  the  interference  of  a  modern  and  very 
active  sect  of  preachers,  who  do  not  exactly  set  their  faces  against  miracles,  but  will  not 
allow  them  to  be  performed  by  any  but  themselves. 

In  their  marriages  the  Welsh  formerly  got  up  a  kind  of  drama  that  was  really  quite 
romantic,  and  the  poorest  of  the  people  observed  the  ceremony.  The  bridegroom,  on  the 
important  morning  that  was  to  make  him  happy,  always  repaired  to  the  house  of  his 
biide  with  a  posse  of  assistants,  for  the  lady  was  invariably  supposed  to  be  hostile  to  his 
designs,  and  was  not  to  be  taken  but  by  force.  She  had  accordingly  her  troop  of  de- 
fenders, and  various  stratagems  and  evasions  and  poetical  parleys  occurred  in  the  course 
of  the  contest,  till  the  bride,  no  longer  able  to  resist  or  to  run,  was  compelled  to  yield  to 
her  conqueror.  We  did  not  hear  that  any  custom  of  the  kind  prevails  at  present,  and  I 
believe  that  the  men  are  now  content  to  take  quiet  possession  of  their  wives,  after  the 
direct  and  common-place  manner  that  is  adopted  in  England. 

I  cannot  pass  over  the  ceremony  of  bundling,  a  mode  of  courtship  that  is  still  in 
full  force  in  many  parts  of  Wales.  It  is  generally  known,  I  believe,  that  bundling  signifies 
the  admission  of  the  lover  into  the  bed  of  his  mistress  ;  all  scandal  being  hushed,  not  only 
by  the  universality  of  the  practice,  but  by  the  prudent  precaution  adopted  by  the  parties 
in  keeping  their  clothes  on.  Unpleasant,  and  not  wonderful  consequences,  nevertheless, 
do  sometimes  result  from  these  very  familiar  conferences,  and  lovers  iiave  been  known  to 
rise  from  their  mistresses  beds,  who  could  never  be  prevailed  upon  to  lead  them  to  church. 
But  the  situation  of  a  lady,  under  such  untoward  circumstances,  is  not  regarded  with 
much  harshness,  and  she  may  still  hope  for  a  husband.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  female 
servants  in  England  to  insist,  as  a  condition  of  their  service,  upon  their  right  of  followers, 
and  we  were  informed  by  a  gentleman  at  Holy  head,  that  all  his  maids  had  stipulated,  as 
a  sine  qua  non,  upon  this  primitive  immunity  of  bundling.  It  were  to  be  wished  that  the 
sex  could  be  induced  to  abolish  so  dangerous  a  custom,  but  in  addition  to  its  agreeable 
nature,  it  is  recommended  by  ancient  use,  and  this  has  such  weight  in  the  principality, 
that  I  know  not  by  what  force  of  reasoning  or  art  of  persuasion  it  could  be  attacked  with 
any  hopes  of  success.  I  beg  to  say,  before  I  quit  the  subject,  that  the  Welsh-women,  in 
spite  of  the  freedom  of  their  system  of  courtship,  are  not  to  be  reproached  with  any 
general  laxity  of  manners ;  they  may  be  very  indulgent  in  their  secret  conversations  with 
their  lovers,  but  it  is  not  from  their  open  behaviour  that  a  stranger  could  decide  upon 
the  evils  of  bundling. 

A  strong  predilection  for  cheese  has  usually  been  attributed  as  a  national  taste  to  the 
Welsh,  but  the  charge  rests  on  no  good  grounds  that  1  could  discover,  and,  at  all  events, 
the  taste  is  perfectly  harmless.  That  they  are  cordial  lovers  of  ale  is  not  to  be  doubted, 

and 


70  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  it  were  to  be  wished  that  they  could  indulge  this  partiality  with  as  little  injury  to  them* 
selves  as  they  may  apply  themselves  to  their  reputed  luxury  of  cheese.  On  festive  occasions 
the  common  people  often  give  way  to  a  desperate  riot,  which  they  call  a  terming,  that  is,  a 
meeting  of  a  party  over  a  barrel  of  ale,  which  they  make  it  a  merit  to  empty  before  they 
separate.  It  matters  not  what  is  the  size  of  the  barrel ;  if  they  cannot  drain  it  in  four  and 
twenty  hours,  they  may  succeed  perhaps  in  eight  and  forty,  and  such  an  interval,  spent  in 
alternate  fits  of  drinking  and  dozing,  does  not,  in  their  estimation,  exceed  the  limits  of  a 
moderate  holiday.  He  that  has  the  strongest  stomach  and  the  stoutest  head  has  the 
honour  of  the  last  draught,  and  reels  away  with  the  vent-peg. 

The  women  do  not  love  ale,  or  at  least  they  use  it  with  moderation;  and  in  atonement 
for  the  freedom  of  my  remarks  upon  their  devotion  to  bundling,  I  must  give  them  full  credit 
for  sobriety,  and  many  other  excellent  qualities.  They  are  singularly  industrious,  and  we 
have  often  had  occasion  to  admire  their  cheerfulness  and  alacrity,  when  engaged  in  modes 
of  drudgery  very  ill  suited  to  their  sex.  A  traveller  very  soon  forms  a  high  opinion  on  this 
serviceable  part  of  their  character,  for  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see  the  women  trot- 
ting rapidly  to  market,  with  a  most  unconscionable  load  upon  their  heads,  and  with  their 
hands,  as  if  they  were  doing  nothing  else,  actively  and  incessantly  employed  in  knitting. 
In  their  persons  they  are  not  generally  distinguished  for  beauty,  though  he  would  be  an 
unreasonable  critic  who  should  presume  to  reproach  them  with  any  very  inexcusable 
plainness.  They  have  mostly  a  fresh,  clear,  florid  complexion,  which  gives  them  a  great 
appearance  of  health,  and  health  with  youth  is  beauty  for  the  multitude,  however  the  case 
may  be  laid  down  in  poetry.  In  their  figures  they  are  short  and  broad,  with  arms  and 
legs  made  for  much  more  useful  purposes  than  to  write  verses  upon.  I  would  just  whisper 
to  them,  at  parting,  a  word  or  two  in  favour  of  the  virtue  of  cleanliness,  against  which  they 
sin  more  prodigally  than  would  be  quite  safe  even  with  damsels  on  whom  nature  had  em- 
ployed a  more  cautious  and  delicate  hand.  A  round  face  or  a  long  face,  a  brown 
one  or  a  fair  one,  may  be  pleasing  according  to  the  various  tastes  of  various  men,  but  all 
are  agreed,  I  fancy,  that  whether  round  or  long,  or  brown  or  fair,  a  face  should  be  clean. 

If  there  are  few  peculiarities  of  manners  and  habits  to  separate  the  lower  orders  of 
the  Welsh  from  the  same  class  of  the  English,  still  fewer  national  distinctions  can  be  dis- 
covered among  the  higher  ranks.  This  conformity  of  character  has  been  effected,  not  only 
by  the  long  confirmed  union  of  Wales  and  England,  but  by  some  circumstances  in  the 
condition  of  this  country,  which  distinguish  it  from  other  parts  of  the  British  empire,  in 
which  a  community  of  government  and  laws  has  not  produced  a  similar  harmony  of  dis- 
position and  feeling.  There  is  not  in  Wales*  as  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  any  great  me* 
tropolitan  town,  the  seat  of  an  university,  where  learned  or  polished  societies  can  assemble 
to  stimulate  national  pride,  by  the  hope  of  rivalling  or  outdoing  other  capitals.  The 
gentry  are  scattered  over  the  country,  and  have  no  grand  haunt  where  they  can  meet  to 
quicken  their  common  prejudices  by  mutual  encouragement,  to  modify  peculiar  habits  of 

life, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  71 

life,  and  digest  an  exclusive  code  of  manners,  which  might  distinguish  them  from  their 
neighbours.  In  Dublin  and  Edinburgh  the  people  live  surrounded  by  much  splendour 
of  their  own  creation,  and  constituting  extended  societies,  regulated  by  their  own  govern- 
ment and  institutions,  are  very  ready  to  feel  and  maintain,  that  Irish  and  Scotch  are  not 
English;  but  Wales  has  no  bed  for  nationality  to  grow  in,  and  the  plant  has  either  perished 
or  changed  its  nature  in  a  foreign  soil.  There  is  not,  I  believe,  a  single  school  of  any 
eminence  in  the  whole  principality  ;  the  children,  therefore,  of  the  higher  orders  are  all 
sent  to  England  for  their  education,  and  of  course  acquire  the  manners  and  opinions  of 
those  with  whom  they  associate.  A  Saxon  might  yet  not  be  considered  a  desirable  com- 
panion among  the  multitude  in  Wales,  but  I  hope  that  the  bitterness  of  ancient  animosi- 
ties is  sufficiently  appeased,  for  a  Welsh  gentleman  to  admit,  without  repugnance,  that  he 
is,  in  every  essential  point  of  character  and  manners,  an  Englishman. 

In  adverting  to  the  customs  and  habits  of  the  people,  it  would  be  an  important  omis- 
sion to  pass  by  the  present  state  of  religious  feeling  and  worship  among  them;  for  religion, 
perverted  and  degraded  as  it  is,  by  the  ignorance  and  audacity  of  those,  to  whom  they 
have  been  persuaded  to  consign  the  cure  of  their  souls,  seems  likely  to  break  down  all  the 
frank  spirit  and  honest  hardihood  by  which  they  were  once  distinguished,  and  of  which 
they  were  once  proud,  and  to  reduce  them  to  a  nation  of  mere  drivellers.     The  Methodists 
have  no  where  made  more  extensive  progress  than  in  Wales,  and  no  where  have  the  trash 
and  nonsense  of  their  faith  assumed  forms  and  attitudes  of  more  outrageous  extravagance. 
Excepting  in  some  of  the  principal  towns,  the  established  church  is  absolutely  deserted, 
more  than  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  being  sectaries,  who  are  content  to 
receive  all  their  religious  instruction  from  the  same  people  who  mend  their  shoes,  and  who, 
without  taking  off  their  aprons,  become  preachers  with  far  less  study  and  preparation 
than  fitted  them  for  cobblers.     There  are  four  denominations  of  Methodists  here,  Cal- 
vinists,  Anabaptists,  VVesleyans,  and  Dissenters,  of  whom  the  first  are  the  most  numerous 
and  powerful.     The  Dissenters,  though  the  first  established,  have  now  the  fewest  adherents, 
but  they  still  retain  some  of  the  privileges  of  their  priority,  and  have  a  permanent  minister 
attached  to  every  chapel.     The  ministers  of  the  VVesleyans  are  chosen  annually,  and  those 
of  the  two  other  orders  itinerate  and  pick   up  a  congregation  where  they  can.     The  in- 
dustry of  these  people  is  indefatigable,  and  they  work  their  way  with  as  much  ingenuity 
as  perseverance.     Their  whole  system  of  operations  is  admirably  well  combined  and  con- 
nected, and  they  advance  in  their  great  business  of  conversion  with  alarming  rapidity,  and 
yet  with  so  little  bustle  and  noise,  that  one  wonders  to  hear  of  the  extent  of  their  en- 
croachments.    Each  of  the  sects  in  Wales  holds  a  grand  annual  meeting  in  every  county, 
which  lasts  two  clays.     The  first  act  on  these  solemn  occasions  is  a  private  consultation 
among  the  ministers,  when  each  delivers  in  his  account  of  successes  and  abuses,  of  ex- 
traordinary cases  of  conversion,  of  miraculous  experiences,  and  manifestations  of  grace, 
£c.  &c.  and  a  general  review  takes  place  of  the  state  of  the  sect,  and  the  best  means  of 

extending 


72  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

extending  its  numbers  and  power.  When  these  matters  arc  arranged,  the  members 
adjourn  to  a  field,  to  preacli  to  the  anxious  multitude,  collected  even  from  the  extremities 
of  the  county  to  hear  them.  Only  one  sermon  is  delivered  on  the  evening  of  the  first  day, 
but  the  last  day  of  the  assembly  is  given  to  preaching  in  serious  earnest.  The  first  sermon 
commences  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  next  at  ten,  another  at  two,  and  the  last 
at  six  in  the  evening,  after  which  the  crowd  disperses,  quite  full  of  grace,  and  expressing 
it  by  some  very  whimsical  signs  and  gestures.  We  may  form  some  idea  of  the  amazing 
increase  of  methodism  when  we  hear,  that  on  the  great  field-day,  held  at  Caernarvon,  on  the 
29th  and  30th  of  September,  1814,  there  were  collected  together  more  than  twenty  thousand 
people.  Some  of  these  joined  the  crowd  merely  from  motives  of  curiosity,  and  some  to 
see  their  friends,  but  by  far  the  greater  proportion  went  duly  prepared  to  listen  and  learn. 
The  voice  of  the  preacher  of  course  could  not  reach  every  part  of  this  unwieldy  congrega- 
tion, but  the  benefit  of  his  exhortations  might  be  transmitted  to  the  extremest  parts  of 
the  ring,  whatever  were  its  circumference,  by  the  contagion  of  groans  and  gesticulations  re- 
ceived hot  from  those  who  were  near  enough  to  hear.  The  whole  company,  it  was  stated 
to  me  by  a  person  who  was  present,  behaved  with  tolerable  decorum  and  sobriety  during 
the  morning  services,  but  in  the  evening  their  passion  was  no  longer  to  be  controlled, 
and  all  was  jumping  and  confusion. 

All  methodists  are  in  the  habit  of  manifesting  their  frenzy  by  strange  gestures  and 
contortions  of  body,  but  this  fancy  for  jumping  is  peculiar  to  the  Welsh.  It  is  not  true, 
as  has  been  said,  that  there  is  a  distinct  sect  denominated  Jumpers  ;  all  the  sects,  what- 
ever may  be  their  differences  in  other  points,  are  agreed  as  to  the  efficacy  of  this  laborious 
practice.  The  women  are  most  inclined  to  this  restless  kind  of  devotion,  and  being  very 
able-bodied  and  long-winded,  they  persist  in  it  with  a  most  determined  activity  and  per- 
severance. They  will  not  only  keep  up  the  game  during  the  whole  time  that  they  are 
before  the  preacher,  but  in  their  way  to  their  homes,  in  the  open  air,  and  before  cool  and 
unsympathising  spectators,  are  often  seen  howling  and  rioting  like  a  set  of  jovial  fellows 
broke  loose  from  a  bout  at  terming.  They  suffer  so  much  agitation  of  mind,  as  well  as 
body,  under  the  ardours  of  this  boisterous  devotion,  that  on  the  recovery  of  their  senses 
they  are  left  in  a  state  of  debility  and  melancholy,  as  if  just  risen  from  sick  beds. 

The  ministers  do  not  in  direct  terms  insist  that  their  congregations  shall  jump,  but 
they  do  not  restrain  them,  nor  give  them  reason  to  believe  that  they  can  put  forth  any 
surer  or  more  becoming  manifestations  of  the  liveliness  of  their  faith.  Jumping  is  nc;t;  an 
established  article  of  practice,  which  serious  persons  are  compelled  to  comply  with  before 
they  can  be  ranked  among  the  number  of  the  elect ;  but  he  that  could  keep  his  feet  to  the 
ground  under  the  stimulus  of  certain  sermons  and  certain  preachers,  would  be  looked 
upon  by  his  brisker  brethren  as  in  a  most  suspicious  and  perilous  condition.  The 
majority  of  the  silly  deluded  people  who  are  fooled  or  frightened  into  these  excesses 
adopt  them  merely  as  ceremonies,  but  very  many  are  hurried  into  them  by  actual  feeling, 

of 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  73 

of  what  kind  it  cannot  much  interest  persons  of  sane  minds  to  enquire.  Sometimes 
a  passion  unexpectedly  seizes  upon  a  particular  neighbourhood  with  the  violence  of  a 
plague,  and  during  the  term  of  its  influence,  no  religious  meeting  takes  place,  either  in  a 
chapel  or  private  house,  for  any  other  purposes  but  those  of  jumping,  tumbling,  and  roar- 
ing, as  if  there  were  no  other  means  of  salvation,  and  there  was  not  a  moment  to  be  lost. 
Under  ordinary  feelings  of  hope  and  fear,  a  congregation  of  Methodists  will  require  a  very 
pathetic  or  intimidating  sermon  to  put  their  legs  in  motion;  but  during  the  season  of  this 
overpowering  excitement,  the  first  note  of  the  preacher's  inspiring  drawl,  or  a  single  glance 
at  his  mortified,  sallow,  sanctified  countenance,  is  sufficient  to  set  them  a-going,  nor  can 
any  thing  short  of  absolute  exhaustion  bring  them  to  a  stand.  The  disease  is  terribly 
contagious ;  a  man  suffering  under  it,  meets  a  friend  in  health,  and  the  conference  ends 
in  a  pas  de  deux  to  a  certainty.  Unbelievers  and  scoffers  who  have  attended  at  meetings, 
with  the  irreverent  intention  of  laughing  at  the  gambols  of  these  frisky  Christians,  have 
been  suddenly  and  irresistibly  drawn  into  the  dance,  in  which  they  have  performed  their 
parts  with  intuitive  precision,  retiring  to  become  sound  believers  and  orthodox  jumpers 
for  the  remainder  of  their  lives.  In  cases  of  sudden  reformation,  the  first  important  symp- 
tom, even  where  a  man  is  not  reminded  of  what  he  is  to  do  by  the  example  of  others,  is 
frequently  this  restlessness  of  body.  A  sinner  feels  himself  somewhat  out  of  order,  and 
growing  serious  and  melancholy,  sheds  a  profusion  of  tears,  and  groans  heavily  :  he  then 
begins  to  clap  his  hands,  and  the  crisis  of  his  redemption  speedily  explodes  in  a  vehement 
sally  of  jumping,  which  is  continued  till  the  patient  falls  breathless  to  the  ground.  A  few 
bouts  of  this  salutary  exercise  are  sufficient  to  shake  him  into  a  new  life  and  make  him 
a  serious  person. 

At  the  meetings  held  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bala  Lake,  in  Merionethshire,  the 
people  had  a  singular  mode  of  exhibiting  the  intensity  of  their  feelings.  As  soon  as  the 
preacher's  vojce  was  heard,  the  congregation  fell  prostrate  on  their  faces,  and  there  they 
lay  till  they  had  recovered  the  breath  which  they  had  lost,  or  supposed  they  had  lost, 
•when  they  all  rose  again,  and  signalized  their  reanimation  by  an  earnest  set-to  at 
jumping. 

On  one  of  these  occasions  a  man  working  in  a  hay-field  was  seen  suddenly  to  fall  to 
the  ground  with  his  scythe  in  his  hand  :  several  people  immediately  ran  to  him,  and  found 
him  motionless  and  senseless;  and  though  various  means  were  employed  to  rouse  him,  he  lay 
wituout  betraying  any  symptoms  of  life  tor  fifteen  minutes,  when  he  began  to  kick  a  little, 
and  so  recovering  the  strength  of  his  muscles  and  the  suppleness  of  his  joints,  sprang  upon 
his  feet,  and  instantly  began  to  jump  with  surprising  animation,  justifying  and  encouraging 
himself  all  the  while  by  adverting  to  David's  dance  before  the  ark  of  God.  Now  this  case 
•was  mentioned  to  me  as  a  striking  proof  that  these  fits  are  not  always  induced  by  the  work- 
ings of  a  man's  imagination,  or  by  any  feeling  of  his  heart  that  can  be  defined  and  reasoned 
upon,  but  that  they  are  produced  by  direct  inspiration  from  above,  sent  to  reclaim  sinners, 
VOL.  ii.  L  or, 


74  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  to  add  converts  to  methodism.  This  man  had  not  been  re- 
formed under  a  sermon,  for  he  had  always  been  extremely  loose  in  his  religious  opinions, 
and  was  altogether  a  sad  profligate  fellow :  he  had  gone  to  the  hay-field  simply  to  mow 
as  other  mowers  might,  and  without  being  conscious  that  he  should  be  at  all  better  em- 
ployed by  joining  the  devout  company  capering  within  his  view,  when  he  was  seized  by 
the  paroxysm  that  I  have  described,  which  entirely  changed  his  dispositions,  effectually 
jolted  away  all  his  bad  habits,  and  confirmed  him  a  true  friend  to  the  tabernacle  for  the 
remainder  of  his  life. 

I  ventured  to  ask  an  old  practised  jumper,  if  he  could  explain  to  me  the  nature  of 
the  sensations  which  manifested  themselves  in  these  transports  of  the  limbs,  and  what 
were  the  peculiar  topics  of  religion  that  were  most  apt  to  inspire  them.  He  was  rather 
pleased  than  otherwise  to  unfold  himself,  and  did  it  with  the  high  tone  of  one  secure  that 
right  was  on  his  side ;  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  justifying  to  my  understanding  the  merit 
or  meaning  of  his  feelings,  and  quite  failed  to  convince  me  of  the  reasonableness  or  neces- 
sity of  his  riotous  mode  of  expressing  them.  The  boundless  love  of  Christ,  he  observed, 
and  the  certainty  of  salvation,  through  his  intercession,  for  all  who  had  faith,  were  the 
subjects  that  awakened  all  his  enthusiasm ;  and  there  are  few,  I  trust,  who  could  meditate 
on  truths  so  consoling  without  the  deepest  and  sincerest  interest.  But  it  is  not  the  love 
of  Christ,  interpreted  with  sober  reason,  and  anticipated  with  humble  hope,  that  provokes 
the  extravagancies  and  antics  of  these  romping  sectaries.  The  majesty,  the  sublimity  of 
the  awful  Being  through  whose  mediation  only  we  can  be  saved,  could  not,  it  might  be 
supposed,  be  ever  absent  from  the  imagination,  even  in  the  contemplation  of  his  mildest 
attributes  of  love  and  mercy;  but,  with  the  Methodists,  Our  Saviour  is  described  in  terms 
of  endearment  of  the  most  familiar  description,  and  his  love  clothed  in  the  dress  of  human 
sentiment,  and,  worse,  of  sentiment  as  it  exists  and  exhibits  itself  only  in  disordered  and 
enfeebled  minds.  In  short,  it  is  made  to  assume  the  exact  likeness  of  that  puling,  mawk- 
ish, crazy  passion,  with  which  they  presume  to  return  it ;  and  without  such  a  communion 
of  such  love,  a  man,  they  maintain,  is  not  a  Christian,  and  cannot  be  saved.  It  is  when 
they  feel  themselves  blessed  with  a  more  than  ordinary  share  of  this  love,  that  in  a  de- 
lirium of  rapturous  acknowledgment,  they  begin  to  jump,  and  while  in  this  state  of  agita- 
tion, they  profess  to  have  a  foretaste  of  those  heavenly  enjoyments  with  which  they  are  to 
be  rewarded  in  a  future  life.  That  they  really  have  a  very  lively  satisfaction  in  the  exer- 
cise may  be  ascertained  from  the  fact  of  their  sometimes  persisting  in  it,  with  occasional 
pauses,  of  course,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun. 

So  various  are  men's  minds,  so  vast  is  the  amount,  and  so  motley  the  complexion  of 
human  infirmity,  folly,  and  vanity,  that  in  the  great  crowd  of  society  we  expect  to  see 
many  odd  freaks,  many  strange  apostacies  from  common  conduct  and  manners,  and 
behold,  without  surprise,  little  clusters  of  people  uniting  to  establish  all  kinds  of  anomalies 
and  absurdities  in  the  principles  and  practice  of  every  calling  and  profession.  But  that 

there 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  75 

there  should  be  a  nation  of  Jumpers,  that  in  a  civilized  country,  twenty  thousand  people 
could  be  collected  together,  all,  under  the  impression  of  religious  feelings,  equally  besotted, 
and  agreeing  in  one  wild  act  of  buffoonery,  is  truly  astonishing.  It  has  been  usually 
supposed  that  people  of  feeble  bodies  are  most  liable  to  such  accessions  of  infatuation ; 
that  those  with  weak  stomachs  and  irritable  nerves,  who  have  no  participation  in  the  plain 
beef-and-pudding  predilections  of  men  with  happier  appetites,  are  very  apt  to  become 
equally  depraved  in  their  moral  tastes,  and  turn  with  a  sickly  disgust  from  the  simple 
lessons  of  truth  and  common  sense,  to  dote  over  the  monstrous  dreams  and  revelations  of 
their  own  disordered  imaginations.  But  here  is  a  plump,  ruddy-faced  people,  who  eat, 
drink,  and  sleep  with  the  unbroken  energy  of  nature,  and  yet  have  turned  epicureans  in 
religion,  and  deserted  the  church  of  their  fathers  to  try  inventions  of  devotion,  as  if  they 
had  lost  all  relish  for  every  thing  obvious,  familiar,  and  natural.  The  moral  diseases  of 
the  dyspeptic  and  hypochondriacal  may  admit  of  some  relief  as  long  as  medicine  has  any 
effect  upon  their  bodies,  and  we  may  reasonably  expect  to  see  the  powers  of  their  minds 
restored  to  their  just  and  proper  balance,  by  the  same  course  of  treatment  that  improves 
the  strength  of  their  digestive  organs,  and  gives  firmness  and  elasticity  to  their  solids. 
But  the  case  of  these  sturdy  sentimentalists  seems  to  be  particularly  hopeless,  and  to  defy 
all  the  resources  of  human  art.  If  any  thing  could  be  done  towards  their  relief  through 
the  medium  of  their  bodies,  the  fulness  of  their  habits,  and  floridness  of  their  complexions, 
appear  to  demand  a  very  different  plan  of  management  from  that  applied  to  less  jolly 
and  hungry  patients ;  but  their  minds  discover  symptoms  of  imbecility  and  decrepitude, 
as  drivelling  as  if  they  had  no  stomachs  at.  all,  and  discourage  the  use  of  any  mortifying 
regimen.  One  should  expect  at  least  something  of  boldness  and  energy  in  the  errors  of 
such  well-fed  visionaries,  but  they  are  altogether  as  sneaking  and  snivelling  as  though 
cheese  had  no  temptations  for  them,  and  ale  no  charms. 

I  question  whether  a  system  of  moral  discipline  would  have  any  beneficial  effects, 
and  it  would  certainly  be  a  task  of  most  extreme  difficulty  to  dispose  these  refractory 
people  to  submit  to  a  trial  of  it.  The  clergy  of  the  establishment  have  been  called  upon 
to  exert  themselves  with  more  earnestness  and  animation ;  but  the  time  for  their  inter- 
ference with  any  chance  of  extensive  success,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is  gone  by.  Possibly  by 
a  more  zealous  employment  of  persuasion  and  authority,  they  might  have  succeeded  in 
preserving  their  flock  staunch  and  steady,  while  they  were  yet  accessible  to  their  exhorta- 
tions and  untempted  by  the  arts  of  the  new  faction;  but  there  seems  to  be  little  proba- 
bility of  their  being  able  to  reclaim  them  from  the  quacks  and  mountebanks,  who  now  find  it 
so  much  to  their  account  to  control  them,  and  who,  by  unnatural  stimuli  and  monstrous 
indulgences,  have  enfeebled  the  proper  tone  and  excitability  of  their  feelings,  and  rendered 
them  quite  incapable  of  finding  any  enjoyment  in  the  simple  consolations  and  sober  pro- 
mises of  rational  religion.  A  man  accustomed  to  highly  seasoned  meats  and  strong 
liquors  will  not  very  readily  be  persuaded  to  feel  that  there  can  be  support  or  comfort 

L  2  in 


76  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

in  plain  food  and  pure  water;  and  I  believe  that  the  mind  will  not  be  found  more  tracta- 
ble than  the  stomach,  and  that  a  religion  recommended  only  by  sound  and  wholesome 
doctrines  would  be  utterly  insipid  to  an  imagination  inflamed  by  the  spices  and  drams  of 
methodism. 

The  inefficacy  of  persecution  in  repressing  the  activity  of  sectaries  has  been  clearly 
ascertained,  and  if  toleration  were  not  a  measure  of  common  justice,  it  should  be  en- 
couraged as  one  of  common  policy ;  for  the  history  of  ages  has  proved  that  penalties  and 
proscriptions  tend  to  increase  the  evils  which  they  were  designed  to  remove,  and  give  ne\r 
energy  to  the  passion,  and  violence,  and  clamour  of  these  whom  they  were  meant  to 
intimidate  and  silence.  No;  the  Methodists  are  infinitely  too  far  gone  in  folly  to  be 
reasoned  down  :  it  would  not  be  possible,  were  it  excusable,  to  knock  them  down,  and 
I  know  not  that  there  is  any  very  flattering  chance  of  laughing  them  down ;  but  I  think 
that,  if  they  are  to  be  put  down  at  all,  it  is  most  likely  to  be  done  by  the  broad  laughter 
which  their  tricks  and  absurdities  are  so  apt  to  provoke.  They  have  themselves,  indeed, 
a  very  dull  sense  of  the  ridiculous,  and  go  through  the  most  farcical  acts  of  their  righteous 
sports,  with  countenances  so  sedate,  that  we  can  hardly  expect  to  bring  them  to  the 
decency  and  virtue  of  laughing  at  themselves ;  but  we  may  succeed,  nevertheless,  in 
shaming  them  into  some  feeling  of  mortification  and  abasement  at  the  general  merriment 
of  which  they  are  the  subjects.  I  may  have  mistaken  the  best  style  of  attack;  but  the 
goodness  of  my  intentions  will  not  be  called  in  question,  from  the  gay  manner  with  which 
I  have  ventured  to  treat  a  subject  certainly  of  deep  importance,  and  connected  with 
topics  which  it  would  be  worse  than  folly  to  think  or  speak  of  with  levity.  If  I  were  to 
be  judged  by  a  methodist,  1  should  naturally  expect  no  mercy;  but  it  will  be  obvious,  I 
hope,  to  common  sense  and  candour,  that  it  is  not  religion,  but  the  abuse  of  it,  by  a 
growing  host  of  fanatics,  that  I  would  hold  up  to  ridicule  and  scorn. 

A  packet-boat  sails  regularly,  when  the  tide  permits,  from  Flint  to  the  opposite 
shore,  and  in  this  we  took  our  passage,  together  with  a  crowd  of  other  passengers,  being 
packed  and  crammed  into  our  places  with  as  little  regard  for  our  ease  in  such  a  state 
of  stowage  as  though  we  had  been  a  dead  cargo.  It  was  proposed  to  us,  as  some  com- 
fort to  know,  that  there  was  quite  as  much  room  on  the  present  occasion  as  we  should 
have  found  on  any  other  day,  and  that  nobody  had  ever  made  the  passage  with  less 
reason  to  grumble.  There  are  but  two  boats,  and  they  can  only  ply  for  about  two  hours 
of  each  flood  ;  it  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  load  them  at  once,  with  as  many  as  will  consent 
to  go  together.  You  may  cross  the  sands  on  foot,  and  ford  the  river,  when  the  tide  is  out; 
but  the  sands  are  always  so  wet  and  muddy,  that  it  is  only  the  hardy  and  heroic  tew,  who 
can  walk  in  mid-day  without  breeches,  that  would  attempt  such  an  expedition. 

\V'e  were  much  pleased  with  the  views  which  were  unfolded  as  we  receded  from  the 
land.  All  the  mud,  and  swamps,  and  marshes  were  now  concealed,  and  the  whole  bed  of 
the  estuary  was  filled  with  a  fine  sheet  of  water,  five  miles  in  breadth.  It  appeared 

bounded 


VOYAGE    IIOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  77 

bounded  on  the  Welsh  side  by  a  country  eminently  beautiful,  a  long  line  of  lofty  hills 
sloping  down  to  the  Dee  with  an  easy  declivity,  varied  with  corn,  and  pasture,  and  woods. 
The  lead-works,  smelting-houses,  and  other  nuisances  (so  the  eye  at  least  adjudges  them) 
that  line  the  water's  edge,  were  now  too  far  distant  to  be  offensive,  and  the  columns  of 
black  and  pale  red  smoke  that  rose  here  and  there  had  no  bad  effect  in  the  landscape. 
This  border  of  Wales  is  certainly  liable  to  the  charge  that  has  been  imputed  to  it,  of 
eclipsing  most  unmercifully  the  English  frontier  opposite,  which  has  an  aspect  as  dreary 
and  uninviting  as  can  well  be  conceived.  It  is  somewhat  enlivened,  however,  an  English- 
man may  be  proud  to  say,  by  the  little  town  of  Parkgate,  whose  single  row  of  houses, 
gaily  dressed  in  whitewash  and  red  ochre,  may  be  seen  and  admired  from  afar.  We 
landed  again  in  our  native  land  at  this  place,  and  in  our  walk  from  the  boat  to  the  inn 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  all  that  it  holds  out  to  the  curiosity  and  amusement  of  a 
stranger.  It  was  built  solely  for  bathers,  but  has  the  misfortune  to  be  in  the  worst  situation 
that  could  be  devised  for  their  accommodation.  We  are  generally  content  in  these  kinds 
of  establishments  to  give  up  all  other  conveniences  for  the  sake  of  the  salt  water,  but  here 
that  is  given  up  too  for  two-thirds  of  the  day,  and,  in  exchange  for  it,  one  has  the  satis- 
faction of  seeing  from  every  window  of  his  house  a  dismal  waste  of  sand,  and  that  too  so 
soft,  and  so  intersected  by  deep  furrows,  that  it  is  not  passable  with  comfort  or  safety  by 
man  or  horse.  One  may  reckon,  indeed,  with  certainty  upon  a  dip  every  day  ;  but  it  is 
annoying  to  be  every  day  remodelling  your  engagements  and  inclinations,  according  to 
the  irregularity  of  the  tide's  attendance.  Ennui  is  not  altogether  a  stranger  at  the  best- 
conditioned  watering  places,  but  who  does  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  dull  and  fidgety 
that  has  suffered  a  week  at  Parkgate?  The  condition  of  the  visitors,  at  low  water,  is  truly 
deplorable ;  but  having  lingered  through  the  full  penance  of  the  ebb  tide,  their  spirits  rise 
with  the  flood,  and  at  high  water  there  is  a  general  burst  of  business  and  animation.  We 
arrived  at  just  such  a  juncture;  when  the  beach  was  all  alive,  and  discovered  a  spectacle 
which  a  foreigner  might  have  moralized  upon  with  more  seriousness  than  we  of  this  free 
country  can  be  permitted  to  do.  Few  of  either  sex  thought  it  necessary  to  hide  them- 
selves under  the  awnings  of  bathing  machines :  posts,  with  ropes  fastened  to  them,  are 
fixed  into  the  sands,  and  these  were  taken  possession  uf  by  numerous  groups  of  women, 
six  or  seven  in  a  row,  jumping,  ducking,  laughing,  and  screaming,  evidently  as  careless  of 
being  seen  as  of  being  drowned.  He  would  be  a  fool,  and  worse,  who  accused  them  of 
any  intentional  indelicacy ;  but  I  do  think  it  would  be  as  well  were  they  not  to  despise 
bathing  machines,  for  the  few  plain  reasons  that  induce  so  many  to  use  them. 

Having  experienced  the  pleasures  and  penalties  of  a  day's  tides  here,  we  took  our 
departure,  and  sailed  down  the  river.  The  channel  is  exceedingly  intricate,  obstructed  by 
numberless  banks,  and  by  a  very  dangerous  reef  near  the  mouth,  called  the  Oldskey  rocks. 
We  found  a  heavy  overfall  upon  this  reef,  but  our  men,  by  very  dexterous  management, 
contrived  to  bustle  though  it,  in  their  little  boat,  without  shipping  a  drop  of  water,  or,  to 

speak 


78  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

speak  to  the  very  letter,  not  more,  as  they  begged  us  to  note,  than  they  could  drink,  were 
it  grog.  Small  boats,  they  observed,  managed  by  skilful  hands,  or  without  hands  at  all, 
will  go  through  almost  any  sea,  but  awkwardness  may  sink  them  in  a  mill-pond.  The 
value  of  skill  they  had  proved  to  us,  and  it  is  certain  that  small  boats  have  broken  adrift 
from  vessels  in  gales  of  wind,  and  been  picked  up  still  buoyant  on  the  return  of  fine 
weather :  the  danger  of  bunglers  need  not  be  confirmed  by  instances. 

At  the  mouth  of  the  Dee,  off  the  Cheshire  shore,  are  three  small  islands,  which  it  was 
our  object  to  see.  They  are  small  scraps  saved  from  the  general  waste  committed  on  this 
coast  by  the  sea,  in  consequence,  I  imagine,  of  being  a  little  more  elevated  than  the  land 
by  which  they  were  surrounded ;  but  they  are  gradually  falling  away,  being  all  composed 
of  sandstone,  so  soft  that  it  may  be  crumbled  with  the  fingers.  We  landed  on  the 
largest  and  most  remote  of  them,  called  Hilbre  Island,  which  is  about  half  a  mile  in  cir- 
cumference, and  lies  distant  a  little  more  than  a  mile  from  the  mainland.  Upon  it  there 
is  a  public  house,  the  only  habitation,  and  a  few  rabbits,  the  only  quadrupeds,  to  which 
nature  supplies  a  very  meager  provision,  only  parts  of  the  island  being  covered  with  a 
scanty  sprinkling  of  grass.  It  is  most  important  as  a  station  for  two  beacons,  which  are 
raised  upon  it,  as  guides  to  vessels  through  the  Swash,  a  channel  between  the  Hoyle 
Sands,  leading  into  Hoylake,  an  admirable  roadstead  for  ships  of  six  hundred  tons  burden. 
There  is  another  entrance  into  this  road ;  but  with  the  wind  in  any  degree  from  the  east- 
ward, the  Swash  is  the  only  outlet  by  which  vessels  can  escape  to  sea. 

The  approaches  to  the  land,  between  the  mouths  of  the  Dee  and  the  Mersey,  have 
a  most  formidable  aspect,  and  a  stranger  casting  his  eye  over  the  puzzling  confusion  of 
banks  which  break  the  sea  would  scarcely  believe  that  these  dangerous  passes  are  avenues 
to  the  great  port  of  Liverpool.  The  land  is  covered  with  lighthouses  and  beacons,  and 
all  means  have  been  tried  to  define  the  channels  with  certainty  and  precision;  but  the 
banks  are  so  apt  to  vary  in  their  positions,  that  a  vessel  may  be  guided  to  her  ruin  by 
beacons  set  up  for  her  safety.  The  view  of  this  strangely  intersected  sea  from  the  island, 
at  low  water,  was  very  singular :  it  had  the  appearance  of  a  boundless  plain  of  sand, 
diversified  by  numerous  rivers  crossing  each  other  in  all  directions.  Nothing  could  be 
more  wild  and  dreary,  and  the  eye  was  not  relieved  on  turning  to  the  land,  which  was 
also  sand,  with  something  of  vegetation  but  not  of  verdure  upon  it,  and  without  a  single 
tree. 

A  heavy  rain  drove  us  from  the  contemplation  of  this  dull  prospect  into  the 
public  house,  where  we  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  all  that  society  has  to  recommend 
it  on  this  small  island.  A  man  and  his  wife  are  the  only  permanent  inhabitants,  and 
they  are  said,  by  various  arts  of  industry,  to  have  amassed  immense  wealth,  not  less, 
fame  has  ventured  to  assert,  than  a  thousand  pounds.  The  crews  of  some  small  vessels, 
which  find  a  harbour  under  one  side  of  the  island,  are  the  great  customers  of  their  tap- 
room; but  their  riches  have  been  gained  principally  by  wrecking,  for  which  business  their 

situation 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  79 

situation  here  is  said  to  be  admirably  calculated.  The  woman  was  a  singular  character. 
She  was  an  active  partner  in  the  miscellaneous  business  of  her  husband,  having  hardihood 
enough  to  despise  the  privileges  which  of  common  right  she  might  have  claimed  for  her 
petticoats.  Accustomed  to  little  communication  with  her  own  sex,  and  being  mostly  in 
the  company  of  seafaring  men,  she  had  acquired  great  roughness  of  manners ;  and  none 
of  her  guests,  of  whom  we  found  a  considerable  party  assembled,  seemed  to  think  it  at 
all  necessary  to  make  any  abatements  or  exceptions  in  their  remarks  on  any  subjects, 
from  respect  to  the  presence  of  the  lady.  By  a  long  course  of  experience  she  had  become 
extremely  learned  in  every  thing  relating  to  shipping,  talked  of  schooners,  brigs,  and 
sloops,  with  the  greatest  fluency,  being  at  no  loss  for  names  in  any  part  of  the  hull  or 
rigging  of  each,  and  seasoning  her  whole  conversation  with  a  dash  of  the  true  sea-slang, 
which,  in  the  mouth  of  a  woman,  had  a  very  novel  effect.  In  the  absence  of  her  husband 
she  had  taken  the  command  of  the  spy-glass,  which  she  frequently  directed  towards  the 
offing,  defining  with  the  utmost  confidence,  and  in  unexceptionable  language,  the  character, 
rig,  trim,  course,  &c.  &c.  of  every  vessel  that  she  saw.  Some  of  the  men  ventured  oc- 
casionally to  contradict  her  on  some  points,  but  she  always  silenced  them  with  a  ready 
volley  of  reasons  and  proofs  in  her  own  favour,  and  clearly  convinced  us  that  she  was  a 
better  judge  of  such  matters  than  any  of  them.  Her  size  and  strength  were  far  beyond 
those  of  the  generality  of  women,  and  she  wanted  nothing  but  a  jacket  and  a  pair  of 
trowsers  to  make  her  as  good  a  foremast  man  as  any  in  the  room.  Women  have  various 
charms,  and  we  admire  them  for  many  kinds  of  excellence ;  but  where  could  a  man, 
doomed  to  gain  a  subsistence  on  Hilbre  Island,  have  found  a  more  perfect  model  in  a 
helpmate  than  this? 

The  retreat  of  the  tide  enabled  us  to  return  to  the  mainland  on  foot ;  but  though  the 
water  had  gone  from  under  us,  it  still  continued  in  a  deluge  over  our  heads.  Half  an 
hour's  walk  brought  us  to  Hoylake,  where  there  is  a  large  boarding-house  established  for 
bathers,  somewhat  more  famed  for  the  excellence  of  its  accommodations  and  the  select- 
ness  of  its  company  than  Parkgate.  We  found  it  entirely  full,  and  could  get  no  better 
terms  from  the  landlord  than  a  dinner,  and  a  promise  of  being  turned  out  into  the  rain 
at  night  to  find  a  lodging  where  we  could.  It  is  amazing  how  very  general  is  this 
passion  for  sea-bathing,  that  has  burst  out  amongst  us  within  this  half  century.  In  this 
period  our  coast  has  assumed  quite  a  new  aspect,  and  instead  of  here  and  there  a  seaport 
town,  or  a  hamlet  of  fishermen,  where  a  harbour  has  been  secured,  is  peopled,  almost  at 
every  league,  with  gay  towns  and  villages,  and  detached  hotels  and  clusters  of  marine 
cottages,  wherever  there  is  access  for  a  bathing-machine.  The  house  at  Hoylake  is  in  a 
miserable  situation,  being  completely  surrounded  by  sand,  which,  in  dry  windy  weather, 
is  so  obtrusive,  that  it  has  been  found  necessary,  rather  at  the  expense  of  the  prospects, 
such  as  they  are,  to  block  it  out  by  a  high  wall.  The  bathers  have  as  much  reason  to 
complain  of  the  tides  here  as  at  Parkgate,  but  the  sands  are  firmer  and  cleaner,  and  the 

pursuit 


80  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

pursuit  of  picking  up  shells  and  weeds  every  day  is  something  to  help  on  existence  be- 
tween breakfast  and  dinner. 

A  new  day  bringing  finer  weather,  we  started  again  on  our  journey,  and  crossing 
the  dreary  peninsula  of  Wirral,  arrived  at  Seacomb  Ferry,  on  the  western  bank  of  the 
Mersey.  Liverpool  appeared  to  great  advantage  on  the  opposite  coast,  with  such  a  grove 
of  masts  extended  before  it  as  could  be  seen,  perhaps,  London  excepted,  in  no  other 
port  in  the  world.  Behind  the  shipping  rose  a  range  of  vast  warehouses,  which  concealed 
from  us  the  great  body  of  the  town,  but  its  extent  was  indicated  by  its  wide-spreading 
atmosphere  of  smoke.  This  was  certainly  the  most  noble  and  animating  sight  that  we 
had  seen  during  our  tour,  not  only  grand  and  picturesque,  but  possessing  a  high  moral 
interest,  as  it  brought  before  our  minds  the  country  in  the  pride  of  its  industry  and  enter- 
prise, and  under  the  most  striking  signs  of  its  wealth,  consequence,  and  power. 

During  a  week  which  I  passed  at  Liverpool,  my  time  was  very  fully  and  agreeably 
occupied  in  rambling  about  the  town,  seeing  sights  and  asking  questions;  but  it  would  be 
useless  and  tiresome  to  give  a  very  particular  account  of  a  place  so  generally  known,  and 
whose  history  and  present  state  have  been  copiously  set  forth  by  more  than  one  guide 
already  published.  A  few  remarks  on  its  general  appearance  and  condition,  its  public 
buildings,  and  the  extent  and  variety  of  its  trade,  will  be  as  much,  I  imagine,  as  the 
reader  will  be  Avilling  to  tolerate.  In  point  of  size  and  population,  Liverpool,  I  believe,  is 
second  to  Manchester,  but,  after  the  metropolis,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  most  beautiful 
town  in  England.  Considering,  however,  that  it  is  the  growth  of  not  more  than  a  cen- 
tury, one  might  have  expected  to  see  something  more  of  the  regularity  and  fitness  of  one 
great  design,  and  in  admiring  many  of  its  parts,  has  too  often  to  regret  that  so  little  judg- 
ment and  taste  have  been  employed  in  determining  their  relations  with  each  other.  There 
are  no  fine  squares,  and  no  one  magnificent  street  for  me  to  describe ;  but  there  is  a  great 
division  of  the  town  which  wears  a  very  courtly  aspect,  being  quite  uninterruped  by 
shops,  and  giving  a  stranger,  in  one  view,  a  just  and  impressive  account  of  its  numerous 
opulent  inhabitants.  The  houses  have  an  appearance  of  peculiar  smartness  and  freshness, 
looking  as  if  but  just  finished,  and  the  streets  being  spacious  and  laid  out  on  elevated 
ground,  are  all  airy  and  healthy.  The  eye  is  immediately  struck  with  one  deformity  and 
inconvenience  that  pervades  every  part  of  the  town :  none  of  the  footpaths  are  flagged, 
but  are  all  paved  with  the  same  kind  of  stones  as  the  middle  of  the  streets,  only  that  they 
are  smaller  and  more  unpleasant  to  walk  on.  One  should  not  have  expected  such  a  want 
of  finishing  in  a  town  whose  inhabitants  are  so  distinguished  for  their  contempt  of  expense 
in  all  matters  of  public  convenience. 

Great  neatness,  cleanliness,  and  liveliness  of  appearance,  characterize  the  greater 
part  of  the  town  in  its  fashionable  and  most  busy  quarters;  but  there  is  a  considerable 
proportion  of  close  and  filthy  alleys  and  lanes  to  be  seen,  though  so  situated  that  they 
need  not  be  found  out  by  one  walking  to  admire  only  the  most  agreeable  objects  of  the 

place 


The  Towns-end  Mill,  Liverpool 


Seacombe  Ferry,  Liverpool 


VOYAGB    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  81 

place.  It  is  complained  of  these  obnoxious  members,  that  almost  as  much  money  has 
been  wasted  in  fruitless  attempts  to  make  them  decent  and  wholesome,  as  would  have 
been  sufficient  to  remove  them  altogether,  and  fill  up  their  places  with  entirely  new  parts. 
There  are  several  excellent,  streets  occupied  by  shops,  which,  from  their  size  and  equip- 
ments, indicate  the  rank  and  prosperity  of  the  town ;  but  it  is  from  a  visit  to  the  docks 
that  a  stranger  can  best  appretiate  its  opulence  and  the  magnitude  of  its  resources.  The 
wet  and  dry  docks,  and  various  basins,  cover  thirty-five  statute  acres  of  ground,  and  the 
whole  of  this  space  is  generally  completely  filled  up  by  vessels,  whose  masts  and  rigging, 
confounded  together,  raise  an  idea  of  numbers  even  more  considerable  than  really  exist. 
The  Old  Dock,  the  first  constructed,  is  advanced  so  far  into  the  town,  that  it  appears 
to  be  quite  shut  out  from  all  communication  with  the  river,  and  nothing  can  be  more 
singular  than  the  effect  of  the  crowd  of  vessels  with  which  it  is  filled,  surrounded  by  shops 
and  warehouses,  and  all  the  bustle  and  confusion  of  the  very  busiest  part  of  the  town. 
The  ranges  of  immense  warehouses  along  the  quays  are  very  imposing,  far  more  vast  than 
any  thing  of  the  kind  that  the  metropolis  can  boast.  They  are,  if  I  remember  rightly, 
nine  stories  high,  but  are  on  a  less  scale  than  others  which  formerly  stood  on  the  same 
ground,  and  were  destroyed  by  fire. 

The  docks  are  all  admirably  constructed,  complete  in  their  accommodations,  and 
under  the  best  possible  system  of  management.  Each  dock  is  regulated  by  a  dock- 
master,  with  a  salary  of  ^£105  per  annum.  His  time  is  fully  employed  in  superintending 
the  docking  and  undocking  of  ships,  appointing  their  situations,  and  adjusting  their  rights 
of  precedence  in  receiving  and  discharging  their  cargoes.  The  mud  and  rubbish  that  ac- 
cumulate in  the  docks  are  removed  every  year  by  a  plan  which  is  said  to  be  of  late  in- 
vention. All  the  docks  communicate  with  each  other  by  means  of  large  tunnels  under 
ground,  through  which  each  may  pour  its  water  for  the  purpose  of  washing  out  its  neighbour. 
When  a  dock  is  to  be  cleaned,  the  water  is  drained  from  it  as  the  tide  retires,  and  the  sluices 
are  opened  into  it,  when  a  number  of  men  shovel  the  mud  into  the  currents,  and  this 
operation  renewed  every  tide  for  twelve  or  fourteen  days,  scours  out  a  dock  more  effectually 
than  any  other  means  that  have  yet  been  tried. 

These  docks,  however,  though  nicely  contrived  in  all  their  uses  and  conveniences, 
are  by  no  means  spacious  enough  for  the  reception  of  the  vast  concourse  of  vessels  con- 
tinually trading  to  the  port.  The  ships  are  frequently  so  closely  jammed  together,  that 
they  fill  up  a  dock  in  one  solid  mass,  and  in  such  a  state  those  which  are  farthest  ad- 
vanced into  the  inclosure,  and  may  be  first  ready  to  depart,  have  no  chance  of  being 
extricated,  till  some  of  the  latest  comers,  at  the  other  extremity,  have  made  way  for  them. 
Such  an  obstruction  is  sometimes  most  seriously  injurious,  for  the  delay  of  a  few  tides 
may,  in  certain  vicissitudes  of  the  wind,  make  a  difference  of  months  to  a  vessel,  in  the 
completion  of  her  voyage.  If  a  vessel  be  not  actually  blocked  in,  it  is  never  certain  that 
she  can  escape  without  damage,  and  it  sometimes  happens  that,  when  perfectly  equipped 
VOL.  ii.  M  for 


32  VOYAGE    ROUJJD    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

for  her  voyage,  she  must,  after  forcing  and  tearing  her  way  through  the  dock,  be  again 
refitted  for  sea.  We  had  the  luck  to  be  present  when  two  hundred  sail,  principally  West- 
Indiamen,  were  undocked  in  a  single  tide,  and  they  made  their  way  amidst  such  a  con- 
fusion of  obstacles,  such  a  conflict  of  commands  and  opinions,  such  peals  of  swearing, 
such  showers  of  blocks,  snapping  of  ropes,  and  cracking  of  bowsprits  and  quarter-boards, 
that  it  was  really  astonishing  to  us,  to  see  them,  in  the  course  of  an  hour,  all  safe  and 
afloat  in  the  river.  The  day  was  very  bright  and  calm,  and  the  fleet,  with  all  their  sails 
set,  loitering  in  columns  and  clusters  upon  the  smooth  water,  presented  a  most  beautiful, 
gay,  and  animating  sight. 

It  has  been  long  in  contemplation  to  supply  all  the  deficiencies  that  are  complained 
of  in  the  docks,  but  it  is  a  question  whether  the  resources  of  the  corporation  will  be 
adequate  to  the  immense  expenditure  that  the  required  improvements  will  demand. 
According  to  the  opinion  of  a  surveyor,  it  will  be  necessary,  by  enlarging  the  old  docks 
and  forming  others,  to  extend  the  dock-room,  which  is  at  present  thirty-five  acres,  to 
sixty-three  acres,  and  that  with  no  view  to  any  extension  of  trade,  but  simply  for  the 
perfect  accommodation  and  security  of  the  vessels  which  now  frequent  the  port.  £  800,000, 
it  has  been  calculated,  will  be  required  for  the  completion  of  these  various  alterations  and 
additions — a  tremendous  sum,  and  formidable  indeed  at  the  present  period,  when  Liver- 
pool is  tottering  under  the  pressure  of  greater  difficulties  than,  perhaps,  ever  tried  her 
strength  before.  The  annual  income  arising  from  the  dock-duties  is  now  about  £  70,000, 
but  old  debts  and  encumbrances  will,  I  believe,  make  large  deductions  from  the  amount 
before  it  can  be  applied  to  new  expedients.  We  found  a  great  deal  of  gloom  and  de- 
spondency among  the  people  here,  with  very  little  ardour  for  projects  of  improvement,  and 
it  may  be  feared,  when  we  consider  the  deep  and  general  embarrassment  of  the  country, 
the  state  of  its  internal  resources  and  foreign  relations,  that  the  accommodations  of  this 
port  will  be  made  sufficient,  not  by  the  extension  of  its  docks,  but  the  reduction  of  its 
shipping. 

The  public  buildings  of  Liverpool  are  striking  monuments  of  the  liberal  and  munificent 
spirit  of  its  inhabitants.  Here  are  no  appearances  of  meanness  and  parsimony ;  every 
building  is  quite  complete,  and  fully  adapted  to  the  purposes  for  which  it  was  designed, 
with  an  addition  of  embellishment,  which  shews  that  the  founders  were  not  only  ready  to 
do  all  that  was  required,  but  to  do  it  in  the  handsomest  manner.  By  an  exertion  of 
extraordinary  industry  and  enterprise,  the  port  was  very  suddenly  enriched ;  and  the  people, 
full  of  spirits  and  high  expectations,  felt  great  pride  in  raising  their  town  into  consequence, 
and  supported  with  eagerness  every  plan  of  improvement  that  could  add  to  its  convenience, 
beauty,  or  dignity.  We  may  appretiate  the  energy  of  this  liberal  disposition,  when  we 
learn,  that  there  is  scarcely  one  of  the  numerous  public  buildings  to  be  seen  here  that  was 
not  raised  within  the  last  half  century. 

The  Town-Hall,  and  the  New  Exchange,  are  costly  and  splendid  structures,  unrivalled 

perhaps 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  83 

perhaps  by  any  buildings  designed  for  similar  uses  in  the  kingdom.  They  stand  in  an 
excellent  situation,  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  handsomest,  busiest,  and  gayest  streets  in 
Liverpool.  I  am  sorry  to  interrupt  this  strain  of  praise,  by  stopping  to  observe,  that 
this  fine  street  is  blocked  up  at  the  other  end  by  the  litter  of  the  vegetable  and  fruit 
market,  which  is  allowed  to  be  held  here,  though  (without  mentioning  how  much  of 
beauty  and  effect  is  spoiled  by  the  nuisance)  it  is  one  of  the  most  crowded  thoroughfares 
in  the  place.  I  am  not  the  first  who  has  written  against  this  inconvenient  and  unsightly 
obstruction,  but  my  ambition  is  that  I  may  be  the  last. 

The  Town-Hall  is  built  of  stone,  in  a  pure  style  of  Grecian  architecture.  The  form  is 
an  oblong  square,  with  a  very  magnificent  portico  in  one  front,  and  surmounted  by  a  light 
and  elegant  dome.  Along  the  fronts  are  ranges  of  Corinthian  columns  and  pilasters,  sup- 
porting a  pediment,  with  well-proportioned  windows  between  them,  which  have  circular 
heads,  resting  on  columns,  and  pilasters  of  the  same  order.  Between  the  capitals  of  the 
columns  are  tablets,  richly  sculptured  with  various  devices  emblematical  of  commerce. 
The  dome  is  crowned  with  a  grand  colossal  figure  of  Britannia ;  and  on  the  pediment  is 
a  range  of  well-executed  statues,  all  allegorical  personages,  whose  characters  and  actions 
are  too  long  to  explain,  and  have  the  misfortune  too  to  be  somewhat  doubtful.  The 
offices  of  the  interior  are  all  very  handsome  and  complete ;  and  on  the  principal  floor  is  a 
noble  suite  of  rooms,  designed  for  the  gala  days  of  the  mayor  and  corporation.  Some  of 
these  are  as  yet  but  imperfectly  furnished  ;  and  one  can  admire  nothing  but  their  size, 
which  is  very  imposing.  The  great  ball-room  is  ninety  feet  long,  and  forty-two  feet  wide; 
and  there  is  a  smaller  one  sixty-six  feet  long,  and  thirty  wide. 

The  Exchange-buildings  are  of  stone,  of  the  same  order  of  architecture  as  the  town- 
hall,  but  less  richly  decorated  with  sculpture.  They  form  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle,  each 
of  which  has  a  piazza,  for  the  accommodation  of  the  merchants  in  rainy  weather.  The 
area  of  the  square  is  a  hundred  and  ninety-seven  feet  two  inches  from  north  to  south, 
and  a  hundred  and  seventy-eight  feet  from  east  to  west ;  being  more  than  twice  as  large  as 
the  area  of  the  London  Exchange.  The  facades  of  the  east  and  west  sides  are  composed  of 
a  rustic  basement,  which  supports  a  range  of  Corinthian  columns  and  pilasters,  surmounted 
by  a  balustrade.  The  north  front  is  of  similar  design,  with  the  addition  of  a  portico  in 
the  centre,  consisting  of  eight  coupled  columns,  twenty-five  feet  in  height,  each  of  which  is 
composed  of  one  entire  stone.  This  portico  corresponds  with  a  similar  one  on  the  north 
front  of  the  Town-Hall,  which  partly  fills  up  the  fourth  side  of  the  quadrangle,  but  the 
openings  on  each  side  of  it  are  so  wide,  that  it  scarcely  appears  connected  in  design  with 
the  Exchange,  and  the  quadrangle,  if  it  cannot  be  said  altogether  to  want  a  side,  has  one 
which  materially  injures  the  beauty  and  simplicity  of  its  effect.  This  is  the  only  defect  to 
be  observed  in  the  design,  and  it  is  an  important  one ;  but  the  whole  building  is  so  mag- 
nificent, so  costly  in  its  materials,  and  elegant  in  its  architecture,  that  it  has  been  said,  and 

M2  it 


84  VOYAGJi    ROUND    GliEAT    BRITAIN. 

it  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say,  that  it  is  one  of  the  finest  works  of  modern  art  in  the 
country. 

In  the  centre  of  the  square  stands  a  monument  to  the  memory  of  Lord  Nelson,  after  a 
design  by  Mr.  M.  C.  Wyatt ;  an  enormous  mass  of  bronze,  more  creditable  to  the  patriotism  of 
the  town  than  the  talents  of  the  artist.  The  weight  of  bronze  is  more  than  twenty-two  tons, 
and  the  expense  of  the  work  amounted  to  J9000.  For  such  a  sum,  the  subscribers  had 
a  right  to  expect  something  more  deserving  of  immortality  than  this  tame  and  ponderous 
production.  The  design  includes  the  usual  mixture  of  nature  and  allegory ;  the  one  without 
spirit  and  expression,  and  the  other  harmonizing  with  it,  and  without  any  other  merit. 
Nelson  is  represented  naked,  and  gigantic  in  all  his  proportions  ;  but  there  is  neither  dignity 
nor  pathos  in  the  action  of  the  figure.  One  foot  rests  on  a  cannon,  and  another  on  a  fallen 
enemy;  a  position  certainly  expressive  of  any  thing  but  magnanimity.  This  enemy  is  not 
an  allegorical  figure  representing  a  nation,  or  some  monster  of  wickedness  and  tyranny; 
but  a  poor  individual  sailor,  whom  it  was  scarcely  worth  while  to  have  made  the  footstool  of 
the  conqueror.  Victory  and  Britannia  are  placed  at  the  head  of  the  hero,  the  one  putting  a 
wreath  round  his  sword,  and  the  other  mourning  for  his  loss.  On  one  side  of  him  stands 
an  enraged  seaman,  rushing  forwards  to  avenge  him,  with  a  countenance  preposterously  at 
cross  purposes  with  his  intentions ;  and  on  the  other  side  squats  Death,  peeping  out  from 
under  some  drapery,  and  with  an  arch  look  fixing  his  bony  fingers  upon  his  victim.  The 
familiar  personages  of  allegory  have  grown  very  vapid  and  uninteresting ;  and  we  may 
reasonably  complain  of  the  tiresomeness  of  looking  at  the  ready-made  Britannias  and 
Victories,  and  the  whole  formal  tribe  of  Virtues,  Vices,  &c.  which  load  the  designs  of 
modern  sculpture.  There  would  be  nothing  to  regret,  I  think,  if  nearly  all  of  these  were 
abolished,  and  their  places  supplied  with  creatures  of  nature,  which  would  undoubtedly 
address  themselves  more  vividly  and  intelligibly  to  our  passions  and  feelings.  But,  if  Death 
must  be  personified,  it  is  quite  time  to  embody  his  terrors  and  powers  in  a  form  of  more 
horrible  grandeur  than  a  human  skeleton,  which  can  remind  us  only  of  our  own  meanness 
and  insignificance. 

The  best  conceived  figures  of  the  composition  are  four  captives  in  chains,  round  the 
pedestal ;  but  their  introduction  here,  it  appears  to  me,  is  offensive  to  all  just  taste  and 
correct  feeling.  Captives  and  chains  can  only  be  disgusting  objects  to  those  who  have  a 
proper  sense  of  the  glory  of  Nelson,  and  the  utility  of  his  victories.  This  is  said  to  be  the 
largest  and  heaviest  monument  that  was  ever  executed  in  this  country;  and  its  magnitude 
must  excuse  the  length  of  my  observations  upon  it. 

The  money  subscribed  for  the  construction  of  the  Exchange-buildings  was  ,£80,000, 
and  there  is  no  more  splendid  proof  of  the  liberality  and  enterprise  of  the  town  than  the 
facility  with  which  this  great  sum  was  raised.  There  were  eight  hundred  shares  of  .£100 
each,  for  which  there  was  a  perfect  scramble ;  and  as  soon  as  the  names  could  be  counted, 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  85 

the  subscription  was  found  to  be  complete.  The  whole  business  was  arranged  in  less  than 
four  hours. 

After  viewing  these  magnificent  structures,  my  next  visits  were  to  the  public  libraries, 
which  are  supported  with  a  degree  of  ardour  that  one  should  not  have  expected  to  find  in 
a  town  so  involved  in  the  bustle  and  cares  of  commerce.  Merchants  are  generally  sup- 
posed to  have  little  time  or  inclination  for  any  thing  but  the  pursuit  of  wealth ;  but  this  is 
not  the  case  at  Liverpool,  where,  if  an  abundance  of  books  and  opportunities  of  reading 
them  be  fair  proofs  of  the  fact,  literature  is  in  a  very  promising  condition.  The  Athenaeum 
is  a  spacious  and  very  neat  stone  building,  containing  both  a  library  and  a  news-room. 
It  was  erected  at  an  expense  of  ,£4000,  which  was  raised  in  the  course  of  one  day.  The 
proprietors  are  five  hundred  in  number,  who  each  pay  annually  two  guineas  and  a  half; 
making  an  annual  contribution  of  one  thousand,  two  hundred  and  fifty  guineas.  The 
books  have  been  selected  with  great  judgment,  and  now  amount  to  more  than  eight 
thousand.  They  are  not  allowed  to  be  removed  from  the  library,  but  the  room  is  fitted  up 
with  every  accommodation  for  those  who  wish  to  read  or  transcribe.  Nevertheless,  the 
library  is  not  much  attended  to,  and  for  very  obvious  reasons.  The  subscribers,  during  the 
mornings  of  every  day,  have  their  time  fully  occupied  as  men  of  business ;  and  in  the 
evenings,  those  who  could  find  amusement  in  books  cannot  give  up  the  quiet  and  comfort 
of  their  homes.  A  man  seldom  sits  down  to  read  with  downright  earnestness  and  attention, 
except  in  privacy,  and  by  his  own  fire-side.  When  once  he  has  put  his  hat  on,  he  becomes 
quite  a  different  creature ;  and  though  he  may  lounge  to  the  library,  he  will  feel  restless 
and  unsettled  there,  and  disposed  only  to  paw  and  play  with  the  books,  handling  more  in 
five  minutes  than  he  could  read  in  a  month.  For  the  purpose  of  occasional  reference,  the 
library  may  be  of  some  use,  but  it  is  not  calculated  to  be  of  any  extensive  benefit  to  the 
proprietors,  who,  resolving  not  to  take  the  books  from  the  room,  have  no  doubt  exceeded 
their  original  intentions,  by  never  taking  them  from  their  shelves. 

The  Lyceum  is  a  larger  and  handsomer  building,  with  much  more  of  the  charac- 
ter externally  of  a  Grecian  school.  The  money  for  its  erection  was  raised  by  public 
subscription,  and  amounted  to  more  than  .£11,000.  The  library  is  a  circular  room,  a 
hundred  and  thirty-five  feet  in  circumference ;  and  lighted  from  the  top  by  a  dome-light. 
It  contains  nearly  eleven  thousand  volumes,  which  are  permitted  to  circulate  among  the 
subscribers,  and  are  more  read,  if  the  bindings  are  less  nicely  preserved,  than  those  of  the 
stationary  volumes  of  the  Athenaum .  There  are  eight  hundred  and  ninety-three  subscribers, 
who  each  pay  half-a-guinea  annually.  Under  the  library  there  is  a  coffee-room,  well 
supplied  with  newspapers,  reviews,  maps,  and  magazines.  This  room  is  supported  by  a 
distinct  subscription  ;  each  subscriber  paying  two  guineas  annually. 

There  is  an  academy  of  painting  at  Liverpool,  but,  I  am  sorry  to  observe,  under  the 
most  lamentable  management.  The  great  object  seems  to  be  to  make  up  an  exhibition, 
and  there  is  not  the  least  judgment  or  discrimination  employed  in  the  selection  of  the 

works 


86  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

works  exhibited :  any  thing  in  a  frame  appears  to  be  sure  of  reception.  An  exhibition 
under  proper  restrictions  may  stimulate  industry  and  emulation,  but  it  is  calculated  only 
to  encourage  carelessness  and  an  injurious  confidence,  when  thus  liberally  thrown  open  to 
all  pretenders.  There  must  be  a  beginning,  it  may  be  said,  and  young  artists  cannot  be 
expected  to  paint  good  pictures;  but  surely  it  is  not  necessary  to  expose  them  in  the 
feebleness  of  their  first  daubing  before  the  public.  Why  introduce  babies  to  company 
before  they  are  fit  to  be  seen?  All  have  a  decent  affection  and  respect  for  the  nursery,  but 
few  like  to  go  into  it,  or  would  wish  it  less  private  and  remote.  I  observed  some  creditable 
performances  by  natives  of  the  place,  and  some  good  works  of  London  artists;  but  these, 
though  they  might  be  looked  at  with  satisfaction  any  where,  served  to  render  the  general 
trash  of  the  room  more  strikingly  contemptible. 

A  stranger,  on  a  view  of  Liverpool,  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  appearance  of  its 
places  of  worship,  which,  to  the  credit  of  the  people,  are  more  numerous,  in  proportion  to 
the  number  of  the  inhabitants,  than  in  any  town  I  know  of.  The  churches  are  all  very 
respectable  edifices,  and  some  of  them  deserve  particular  notice.  St.  Nicholas's,  which 
was  long  the  only  church  in  the  place,  has  been  rebuilt  of  late  years  ;  but  in  divisions  at 
long  intervals  of  time,  and  with  little  attention  to  the  harmony  of  its  parts.  It  first 
received  a  new  body,  and,  in  the  course  of  time,  the  old  tower  was  repaired  and  furnished 
with  a  new  spire,  but  the  work  was  so  injudiciously  constructed  that  it  soon  fell,  forcing 
its  way  through  the  roof  of  the  church,  unfortunately  at  a  time  when  a  congregation  was 
assembling  for  divine  service.  This  terrible  accident  happened  on  Sunday  the  llth  of 
February,  1810,  while  the  second  peal  was  ringing:  few  men  or  women  had  entered  the 
church,  and  they  all  escaped  with  little  injury;  but  a  procession  of  children  from  a  charity 
school  had  advanced  far  up  the  centre  aisle  at  the  moment  when  the  tower  fell,  and 
twenty-eight  of  them  were  buried  beneath  its  ruins.  Of  these,  twenty-three  were  killed  on 
the  spot,  and  of  those  who  were  extricated  alive,  one  died  speedily  after  her  removal. 
The  sufferers  were  all  girls,  the  boys,  who  followed  last  in  the  procession,  not  having 
entered  the  doors. 

A  new  Gothic  tower  has  been  lately  added,  elaborately  enriched  with  sculpture,  and 
terminating  in  very  elegant  pinnacles.  It  is  a  beautiful  structure,  but  considerably  too 
large  for  the  body  of  the  church,  which  it  quite  shames  too  by  the  sumptuousness  of  its 
embellishments.  This  building  stands  near  the  river's  side,  and  there  was  formerly  a 
statue  of  St.  Nicholas  in  the  church-yard,  who  was  reputed  the  tutelary  saint  of  mariners, 
and  received  an  offering  from  all  those  who  proceeded  to  sea,  with  the  desire  of  a 
successful  cruize  and  a  safe  return. 

St.  Paul's  is  an  imitation,  in  very  reduced  miniature,  of  the  great  cathedral  of  the 
metropolis.  It  is  an  imposing  but  rather  gloomy-looking  building,  miserably  situated, 
and  not  to  be  seen  but  in  close  connexion  with  the  shabbiest  part  of  the  town.  A  more 
serious  defect  is,  that  the  preacher's  voice  cannot  be  heard  in  it  by  more  than  half  of  his 

congregation : 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  8? 

congregation :  all  variations  in  the  position  of  the  pulpit  have  been  tried,  but  the  evil  has 
been  found  to  be  irremediable,  and  the  church  consequently  is  very  little  attended. 

St.  George's  is  a  beautiful  church,  of  Greek  architecture,  the  body  being  fronted  by  a 
Doric  range  bearing  an  attic  entablature,  with  a  parapet  ornamented  with  vases.  It  had 
formerly  an  appropriate  steeple,  which  was  lately  taken  down,  from  an  apprehension  that 
the  foundation  was  not  secure. 

St.  Thomas's  is  likewise  of  a  Greek  order,  simple,  but  extremely  elegant,  and  noted  for 
its  line  spire,  which  is  more  than  two  hundred  feet  in  height.  The  body  of  the  churclr 
consists  of  a  rustic  basement  and  two  rows  of  windows,  between  which  are  Ionic  pilasters, 
and  above  them  a  cornice  and  balustrade  terminated  by  vases.  At  the  east  end  is  an 
octagonal  projection,  forming  the  chancel.  There  are  eleven  other  churches  for  the 
service  of  the  established  religion,  and  chapels  and  meeting-houses  for  dissenters  of  every 
description,  all  of  which  are  built  with  great  neatness,  and  are  as  complete  as  can  be 
desired  in  all  their  accommodations. 

The  charitable  institutions  of  this  town  are  very  numerous,  and,  like  every  thing  here 
that  is  supported  by  public  patronage,  they  are  all  on  a  large  and  liberal  scale.  Liverpool 
has  the  credit  of  having  first  designed  and  established  a  school  for  the  indigent  blind,  a  most 
humane  and  admirable  institution,  affording  the  means  of  permanent  relief  and  comfort  to 
objects  who,  in  their  natural  state  of  helplessness,  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  destitute 
and  forlorn  of  human  beings.  The  school  exhibits  a  most  interesting  and  affecting  scene; 
a  little  community  of  one  hundred  individuals,  all  deprived  of  a  sense  the  most  important 
to  human  invention  and  action,  yet  all  occupied  by  some  useful  employment,  and  all 
cheerful  and  happy.  It  is  pleasing  to  see  so  much  benefit  to  society  derived  from  those 
who  were  long  considered  as  doomed  to  hopeless  inactivity,  but  their  industry  is  quite 
delightful  to  the  mind,  as  it  affects  themselves;  as  it  relieves  them  from  a  condition  of 
intolerable  dulness  and  gloom,  from  the  miseries  of  want  or  the  humiliation  of  dependence, 
and  admits  them  as  active  partners  in  the  exhilarating  business  of  life. 

On  my  introduction  into  the  school,  my  first  impression,  on  a  view  of  a  calamity  in 
so  terrible  an  aggregate,  Avas  a  very  painful  one ;  but  a  short  familiarity  with  the  scene 
changed  my  feelings,  arid  reconciled  me  to  the  condition  of  those  who  had  certainly 
no  distressing  sense  of  their  own  privation.  A  more  contented  and  lively  society  I  have 
never  seen  assembled  together.  Here  are  people  of  all  ages,  men,  women,  and  children, 
all  as  in  a  state  of  common  infancy,  learning  to  be  useful  and  happy.  There  is  no  art 
requiring  only  manual  skill  in  which  the  blind,  from  the  quickness  of  their  sense  of  touch, 
cannot  become  proficient,  but  they  require  more  patient  care  and  attention  from  their 
instructors  than  the  poor  have  time  to  give  them,  or  can  secure  for  them  from  the  common 
masters  of  trades;  and  without  such  an  asylum  as  this  to  befriend  them,  if  a  poor  couple 
have  the  misfortune  to  have  a  blind  child,  they  must  of  necessity  leave  it  to  grow  up 
unfitted  for  all  useful  industry,  The  principal  occupations  in  which  the  pupils  of  the 

school 


86  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

school  are  instructed  are  rope-making  spinning,  basket-making,  plaiting  sash-lines, 
weaving  floor-cloth  and  sacking,  and  making  list  shoes,  worsted  hearth-rugs,  and  rope 
mats.  Few  are  found  incapable  of  learning  some  of  these  employments,  and  many 
acquire,  with  no  long  apprenticeship,  a  skill  in  the  most  difficult  of  them,  finishing  their 
work  not  only  with  perfect  neatness,  but  with  care  and  rapidity  enough  to  enable  them  to 
gain  a  comfortable  subsistence  by  their  labour.  A  great  proportion  of  the  boys  are 
employed  in  rope-making,  in  which  they  speedily  become  skilful;  and  it  is  an  art  which, 
in  a  sea-port  like  Liverpool,  is  a  certain  provision  for  them.  I  observed  a  few  of  the 
women  sitting  at  needle-work,  and  I  saw  them  thread  their  needles  with  such  readiness, 
that  I  had  no  doubt  they  could  use  them  with  effect. 

Music  seems  to  be  the  favourite  amusement.  There  are  eight  or  ten  harpsichords, 
which  are  seldom  idle,  the  pupils,  as  it  appears  to  me,  being  permitted  to  devote  them- 
selves to  them  with  too  little  discrimination.  It  may  appear  hard  to  deny  them  any 
amusement  that  they  can  partake  of,  but  they  come  hither  not  merely  to  amuse  them- 
selves, but  for  the  more  important  purpose  of  learning  to  gain  their  bread.  Few  of  those 
who  make  music  their  study  can  expect  to  render  it  the  means  of  their  future  main- 
tenance; yet,  when  once  their  passion  for  it  is  raised,  they  manifest  a  distaste  for  all 
other  occupations.  I  did  not  hear  a  single  good  performer ;  and  several  had  commenced 
at  an  age  which  rendered  an}'  tolerable  proficiency  perfectly  hopeless.  A  few  have  left 
the  school  fitted  for  organists  and  teachers  of  music,  but  such  an  advancement  cannot  be 
the  lot  of  half  of  those  who  apply  themselves  to  the  study.  Those  who  do  not  succeed 
are  very  much  to  be  pitied,  for  after  losing  all  the  solid  benefits  of  the  institution,  they 
leave  it  more  deplorably  circumstanced  than  on  their  entrance,  in  having  a  new  taste  with 
no  opportunities  of  gratifying  it.  It  would  be  advisable  surely  to  shut  out  all  except  young 
pupils  from  the  harpsichord,  and  to  exchange  the  pursuit  for  some  more  serviceable  em- 
ployment, in  those  who  did  not  speedily  manifest  a  degree  of  talent  that  promised  success. 

There  are  stated  hours  for  work,  but  there  seems  to  be  no  proper  system  of  coercion 
for  those  who  exhibit  signs  of  obstinacy  and  indocility.  The  full-grown  scholars  must 
be  governed  by  appeals  to  their  reason  and  their  sense  of  shame,  but  for  the  younger  part 
of  the  society  there  appears  to  be  a  necessity  for  some  more  impressive  mode  of  discipline 
than  that  which  is  adopted.  I  was  taken  to  see  a  boy  who  showed  a  singular  perversity 
of  temper,  and  an  invincible  determination  to  do  nothing  that  he  was  requested  to  do.  I 
found  him  among  a  company  of  busy  basket-makers,  engaged  in  tying  and  untying  knots 
in  a  piece  of  string,  and  he  continued  to  devote  himself  to  this  employment  with  stupid 
earnestness,  quite  unmoved  by  all  the  efforts  of  reasoning  and  remonstrance  that  I  could 
bring  forward  for  his  service.  He  was  not  at  all  wanting  in  vivacity  at  the  hours  of  play, 
but  as  soon  as  the  bell  rang  for  business  he  became  thus  silent,  sullen,  and  untractable. 
Every  art  I  was  told  had  been  used  to  bring  him  to  his  senses ;  but  when  I  mentioned  the 
rod,  or  at  least  the  name  of  it,  I  was  given  to  understand  that  no  severity  of  treatment 

was 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN7.  89 

was  permitted  in  the  school.  But  surely  a  little  correction,  such  as  boys  fear,  would  in 
this  instance  have  been  lenity.  As  it  was,  this  perverse  little  scoundrel  would  in  a  short 
time  be  dismissed  as  incorrigible,  to  lament,  on  a  future  day,  that  he  was  not  whipped  as 
he  deserved. 

Proper  attention  is  bestowed  upon  the  moral  conduct  of  the  pupils,  and  there  is  an 
express  provision  for  their  religious  education.  The  males  and  females  were  formerly 
permitted  to  associate,  but.  they  are  now  confined  to  separate  divisions  of  the  house.  I 
have  not  heard  that  any  blameable  familiarities  resulted  from  the  freedom  of  their  former 
intercourse,  but  courtship  ensued,  and  marriages  were  negotiated,  and  it  was  wisely 
resolved  to  discourage  an  union  which  could  bring  nothing  but  misery  to  the  parties.  To 
parents  blind  and  poor,  children  would  indeed  be  a  curse. 

The  inmates  are  all  decently  and  comfortably  clothed :  their  food  is  excellent,  perhaps 
rather  too  dainty  for  people  who  must  hereafter  be  content  with  the  hard  fare  which  they 
can  earn  by  manual  labour :  they  have  an  open  court  to  take  exercise  in,  and  every 
department  of  their  house  is  neat,  clean,  and  wholesome. 

The  institution  is  supported  by  an  annual  subscription,  and  has  been  aided  by 
splendid  donations  from  many  of  the  most  distinguished  people  of  the  country.  Accord- 
ing to  the  last  report  published  by  the  committee,  the  number  of  subscribers  resident  in 
Liverpool  amounted  to  six  hundred  and  ninety-seven;  and  there  was  a  considerably 
greater  number  from  various  parts  of  the  kingdom.  The  whole  amount  subscribed  was 
£1253  10s.  6d,  of  which  J594  19«-  was  contributed  by  the  people  of  the  place.  The 
benefits  of  the  charity  are  not  restricted  to  the  town  of  Liverpool,  but  are  open  to  all 
objects  properly  recommended,  from  whence  soever  they  come*.  Of  three  hundred  and 

*  The  following  is  a  list,  according  to  the  last  report,  of  the  number  of  pupils  admitted  into  the  school  from  its 
commencement,  January  17,  1791,  to  December  31,  1813;  with  a  statement  of  the -circumstances  under  which  they 
appear  to  have  beeu  totally  or  partially  deprived  of  sight.  The  partially  blind,  it  is  stated,  had  lost  their  sight  to  all 
useful  purposes. 

Totally.     Partially.     Total. 
Blind,  from  their  birth  .....  24  8  32 

in  consequence  of  small-pox  .  .  .  97  15  112 

inflammation  .  .  .  69  26  95 

cataracts  .  .  .  .  IS  34  47 

external  injury  .  .  .  15  9  24 

gutta  serena  .  .  22  13  35 

imperfect  organization         ...  167 

Lost  their  sight,  at  sea  .  .  .  81  9 

— —  by  gradual  decay  ...  303 

after  fever  .  .  .  404 

measles  ...  022 

hooping  cough         ...  101 


—  convulsions  ...  123 


From  causes  not  mentioned  or  imperfectly  described  in  the  certificates  5  10  15 

263  126  389 

VOL.  ii.  N  eighty- 


90  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

eighty-nine  persons  admitted  into  the  school  since  its  first  establishment,  eighty-three 
belonged  to  the  parish  of  Liverpool,  a  hundred  and  four  to  other  parishes  in  the  county  of 
Lancaster,  and  two  hundred  and  two  to  various  parts  of  the  united  kingdom.  A  con- 
siderable sum  is  raised  annually  by  the  sale  of  the  articles  manufactured  by  the  scholars,  a 
source  of  honourable  pride  to  them,  which  saves  them  from  that  moral  abasement  apt  to 
be  incurred  by  those,  who  yield  themselves  up  indolently  and  contentedly  to  be  supported 
by  charity. 

It  will  not  be  expected  that  I  should  enter  into  minute  details  with  respect  to  all  the 
charitable  institutions  supported  by  this  liberal  town,  but  many  of  them  are  so  wise  and 
judicious  in  their  design  and  regulations,  and  so  extensively  beneficial,  that  1  cannot,  pass 
them  over  without  notice.  Here  are  no  receptacles  which  are  open  indiscriminately  to  all 
who  can  plead  distress  as  their  recommendation ;  no  poor-houses  which,  established  for 
the  relief  of  those  who  want,  support  in  idleness  those  who  are  able  to  work.  A  very 
active  but  mistaken  benevolence  has  crowded  the  country  with  such  institutions,  but 
experience  has  proved  that  they  only  multiply  the  evils  which  they  were  intended  to 
reduce,  affording  no  doubt  just  and  deserved  relief  in  many  cases  of  distress,  but  operating 
generally  as  a  check  upon  industry,  by  holding  out  a  refuge  in  the  last  extremity  to  idle- 
ness and  profligacy.  Here  are  many  asylums  for  the  indigent  and  unfortunate,  which  are 
encouraged  by  a  liberal  aid  from  the  public ;  but  it  has  been  a  study  to  let  charity,  in  the 
most  limited  sense  of  the  word,  enter  as  little  as  possible  into  their  design,  which  is  not 
unconditionally  to  assist  the  needy,  but  to  put  them  in  the  way  of  assisting  themselves; 
not  gratuitously  to  clothe  and  feed  the  naked  and  hungry,  but  to  teach  them  to  clothe  and 
feed  themselves ;  not  to  give  wages  to  those  who  are  without  work,  but  to  afford  those  who 
are  disposed  to  industry  opportunities  of  employment  and  reward. 

The  House  of  Industry,  which,  as  its  name  imports,  was  founded  with  these  views, 
is  a  handsome  building,  neat  and  complete  in  all  its  parts,  and  capable  of  accommodating 
a  great  number  of  inmates.  On  one  floor  is  a  hall  ninety  feet  long,  and  twenty-four  wide, 
furnished  with  three  ranges  of  tables,  at  which  four  hundred  people  can  dine  at  a  time.  Over 
this  are  two  stories,  each  containing  a  large  room  for  spinning  and  other  kinds  of  work. 
At  the  back  of  the  building,  and  a  little  detached  from  it,  are  two  large  wings,  containing 
numerous  rooms,  all  cleanly  and  comfortable,  in  which  the  poor  live.  The  whole  work 
was  erected  at  an  expense  of  ,£8000. 

At  a  little  distance  from  this  house  stands  the  House  of  Recovery,  a  neat  stone  build- 
ing, in  a  very  airy  and  healthy  situation.  Its  design  is  to  receive  patients  afflicted  with 
fever,  who  are  precluded  by  poverty  from  the  benefit  of  medical  advice,  or  reside  in  close 
and  unwholesome  places,  which  retard  the  cure  of  their  disease,  and  render  it  dangerous 
to  the  neighbourhood. 

The  Female  School  of  Industry  is  an  excellent  institution,  admirably  regulated.  Its 
object  is  to  educate  the  female  children  of  the  poor,  who  are  here  instructed  in  reading, 

writing, 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  91 

writing,  and  the  common  rules  of  arithmetic,  and  also  in  needle-work,  knitting,  and  spin- 
ning. After  a  certain  period  elections  take  place  of  the  most  deserving  girls,  who  are 
taught  all  kinds  of  house-work  to  prepare  them  for  service.  They  remain  in  the  school 
one  year  after  this  election,  contributing  a  weekly  sum  out  of  their  earnings  towards 
defraying  the  expenses  of  their  board,  lodging,  &c.  Each  child  subscribes  a  halfpenny  a 
day  out  of  her  earnings  to  a  general  fund,  which  is  allowed  to  accumulate,  and  continues 
to  give  the  same  contribution  out  of  her  wages  after  she  has  left  the  school.  After  fourteen 
years  subscription  she  is  entitled,  on  her  first  marriage,  to  receive  two  guineas ;  and  an  equal 
sum  on  the  birth  of  every  child  that  she  may  have  born  in  wedlock.  Any  subscriber  remain- 
ing unmarried  to  the  age  of  fifty-five,  or  being  left  a  widow  at  such  a  period  of  life,  is  allowed 
the  sum  of  two  guineas  per  annum  as  long  as  she  lives.  A  separate  fund  is  formed  from 
the  subscriptions  of  honorary  members,  and  applied,  at  the  discretion  of  the  committee, 
to  augment  the  annuities,  and  furnish  relief  to  members  of  the  society  in  particular  cases 
of  distress.  A  distinct  account  is  kept  of  each  girl's  work,  and  the  profits  are  placed  to 
her  credit.  Out  of  these  the  expenses  of  her  clothing  and  her  subscription  to  the  fund  are 
paid ;  and  if  there  be  any  surplus,  it  is  laid  out  in  providing  for  her  a  stock  of  clothes, 
and  other  necessaries,  on  her  quitting  the  school,  and  entering  into  service. 

The  Blue-coat  Hospital  receives  nearly  four  hundred  children,  about  fifty  of  whom  are 
girls,  who  are  educated,  clothed,  and  supported.  They  are  engaged  for  one  half  of  the 
day  in  the  school,  where  they  are  taught  reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic ;  and  during  the 
other  half  are  at  work.  They  are  admitted  into  the  hospital  at  the  age  of  eight,  and  put 
out  as  apprentices  at  fourteen. 

The  Welsh  Charitable  Society  instructs,  clothes,  and  apprentices,  poor  children 
descended  from  Welsh  parents,  who  have  no  parochial  settlement  within  the  town. 
Under  the  direction  of  the  same  society  there  is  a  more  extensive  school,  in  which  more 
than  four  hundred  children  are  educated  on  Lancaster's  system.  It  is  very  pleasing  to 
observe  how  much  attention  is  paid  in  this  town  to  the  education  of  the  poor,  undoubtedly 
of  all  others  the  most  certain  means  of  saving  them  from  the  vice,  and  misery,  and  degra- 
dation, into  which  they  inevitably  sink,  when  left  without  any  kind  of  moral  and  religious 
instruction,  and  sacrificed,  as  soon  as  they  can  stand,  to  the  manufactories.  There 
are  many  other  schools  supported  by  subscription  besides  those  which  I  have  already 
mentioned.  The  Moorfields  Sunday  and  Daily  Charity  School  is  on  an  extensive  scale, 
receiving  more  than  three  hundred  boys  and  girls  for  education.  The  Hunter-street  Cha- 
rity School  was  built  by  the  late  Mr.  Waterworth,  of  this  town,  in  1792,  and  was  sup- 
ported by  subscription  till  1803,  when  Mrs.  F.  Waterworth,  his  sister,  endowed  it  with 
the  sum  of  .£4000  for  its  future  maintenance.  It  receives  a  hundred  and  twenty  boys, 
and  a  hundred  and  forty  girls.  The  St.  James's  School,  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  boys,  was 
erected  by  the  late  Moses  Benson,  Esq.  The  Manesty-lane  Day  and  Sunday  Charity 
School  receives  a  hundred  and  twenty  boys  and  girls ;  and  the  Circus-street  School  three 

N  2  hundred 


93  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

hnndred  and  twenty-six.  The  St.  Andrew's  Charity  School  was  instituted  in  1809,  for  the 
purpose  of  instructing  the  children  of  poor  Scottish  parents,  and  admits  fifty-five  boys  and 
fifty  girls.  The  Benevolent  Society  of  St.  Patrick  instructs,  clothes,  and  apprentices,  the 
children  of  poor  Irish  parents.  I  hope  that  this  minuteness  on  the  subject  of  establish- 
ments so  much  to  the  credit  of  the  town,  will  not  be  considered  fatiguing  or  misplaced. 

The  Infirmary  is  a  building  on  a  scale  of  absolute  magnificence,  extending  in  front 
one  hundred  and  twenty  yards,  and  in  depth  one  hundred  and  ninety.  It  has  three 
stories,  containing  spacious  and  commodious  wards ;  two  wings  are  connected  with  it  by 
colonnades ;  before  it  is  a  large  area,  laid  out  in  a  lawn,  enclosed  with  an  iron  railing  and 
gates,  and  behind  is  an  extensive  garden,  which  supplies  the  patients  with  vegetables,  and 
various  kinds  of  medicinal  herbs.  This  institution  is  most  generously  supported,  and  is 
on  a  plan  of  very  liberal  beneficence.  It  is  open,  not  only  to  the  sick  poor  of  Liverpool, 
but  from  all  quarters  of  the  world,  providing  only  that  they  have  a  recommendation  by  a 
subscriber,  Avhich,  if  they  are  proper  objects,  is  of  course  readily  procured.  The  charity  is 
supported  by  an  annual  subscription  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and  neighbourhood, 
subscribers  of  two  guineas  having  the  liberty  of  recommending  patients. 

The  two  wings  of  this  building  are  devoted  to  a  distinct  establishment,  the  Seaman's 
Hospital,  intended  for  the  maintenance  of  decayed  seamen  of  the  port  of  Liverpool,  and 
their  widows  and  children.  It  is  supported  by  a  monthly  allowance  of  sixpence  from 
every  seaman  sailing  from  the  port,  a  sum  which,  by  act  of  parliament,  he  is  obliged  to 
pay  out  of  his  wages. 

The  Dispensary  is  a  charity  widely  and  signally  beneficial,  relieving  an  immense 
number  of  sufferers  at  a  comparatively  trifling  expense.  It  is  conducted  by  a  president, 
two  auditors,  seven  physicians,  three  surgeons,  and  an  apothecary.  All  patients  are 
considered  proper  objects  for  relief,  who  are  recommended  by  the  magistrates,  the  clergy, 
churchwardens,  or  by  any  subscriber.  Two  physicians  attend  every  day,  Sunday  ex- 
cepted  ;  and  the  exception,  I  think,  is  a  somewhat  unreasonable  one,  when  we  advert 
to  the  nature  of  the  institution.  A  surgeon  is  also  in  constant  attendance,  and  another, 
or  the  apothecary,  regularly  visits  patients  at  their  own  houses,  who  are  unable  to  apply 
personally  at  the  Dispensary.  At  least  ten  thousand  people  annually  receive  assistance 
from  this  charity,  yet  the  annual  expenditure  does  not  exceed  J1000. 

The  Ladies'  Charity  is  under  the  patronage  of  ladies  of  the  first  rank  and  respecta- 
bility in  the  town,  with  a  lady  patroness  at  their  head.  The  object  of  it  is  the  relief  of 
poor  married  women  in  child-bed,  at  their  own  homes,  where  they  receive  proper  medical 
assistance,  and  are  supplied  with  food,  the  use  of  bed-linen,  and  every  other  necessary 
that  their  situation  requires.  There  are  no  circumstances  under  which  a  poor  family  is 
more  powerfully  recommended  to  charity  than  when  the  mother  of  it  is  thus  confined  to 
her  bed,  wanting  many  comforts  beyond  their  resources  to  bestow,  yet  involving  them 
in  debt  and  embarrassment  by  the  scanty  aid  that  she  receives,  and  adding  another 

dependent 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  93 

dependent  upon  their  future  earnings.  A  small  sum  judiciously  laid  out  in  such  a  case 
not  only  gives  present  and  essential  comfort  to  a  woman  in  the  most  trying  of  situations, 
but  may  save  a  whole  family  from  years  of  difficulty  and  distress.  They  have  little  know- 
ledge of  what  is  endured  in  the  garrets  and  cellars  of  the  poor,  who  are  ignorant  of  the 
lasting  effect  that  £10  more  or  less  may  have  upon  the  condition  of  a  family. 

The  Society  for  Bettering  the  Condition  and  Increasing  the  Comforts  of  the  Poor  is  of 
late  formation,  but  must  be  of  singular  use  in  a  great  town.  The  general  object  of  it,  as 
stated  in  their  rules,  is  to  collect  information  respecting  the  circumstances  of  the  poor,  and 
in  interposing  to  assist  them,  to  keep  always  in  view  the  principle,  that  the  best  relief  they 
can  receive  is  that  which  comes  from  themselves,  and  that  the  most  effectual  method  of 
improving  their  condition  is  by  the  encouragement  among  them  of  industry  and  prudence. 
The  town,  under  the  direction  of  this  society,  is  divided  into  districts,  in  each  of  which  a 
respectable  inhabitant  personally  investigates  the  state  of  the  poor  around  him ;  and  two 
spacious  warehouses  have  been  erected  for  the  sale  of  provisions  to  them  at  reduced  prices. 
The  business  of  the  society  is  transacted  by  a  committee  of  twenty-one  members,  which 
has  power  to  give  such  rewards,  for  particular  instances  of  good  conduct,  as  the  state  of 
the  funds  will  admit,  for  the  purpose  of  directing  the  general  attention  of  the  poor  to  what 
will  best  promote  their  interest  and  happiness. 

In  addition  to  these  numerous  and  admirable  institutions  and  associations  may  be 
mentioned  the  Committee  for  the  Relief  of  Debtors  confined  in  the  Borough  Gaol,  the 
Lunatic  Hospital,  the  Magdalen  Asylum,  the  Institution  for  restoring  Drowned  Persons, 
and  the  Stranger's  Friend  Society.  So  splendid  a  list  of  charities,  so  comprehensive,  so 
wisely  designed  and  munificently  encouraged,  no  town,  I  believe,  of  equal  extent  in  the 
kingdom  can  boast  of,  and  yet  almost  all  of  them  have  been  established  within  the  last 
half  century. 

The  Liverpool  New  Prison  is  an  immense  building,  the  largest  gaol,  it  is  said,  in  the 
country,  in  six  divisions,  which  are  ranged  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  inclosing  the 
governor's  house.  It  is  managed  entirely  on  Howard's  system,  and  has  space  enough  to 
allow  all  his  excellent  provisions  for  the  accommodation  and  comfort  of  the  prisoners  to 
be  carried  into  full  effect.  All  the  apartments  and  offices,  I  observed,  were  exceedingly 
neat  and  clean,  and  a  general  order  and  decency  were  preserved  among  a  very  numerous 
body  of  malefactors  that  were  extremely  gratifying  and  consoling. 

The  trade  of  Liverpool  is  a  great  and  complicated  subject,  which  I  am  not  prepared 
to  set  forth  as  I  could  wish,  having  found  the  custom-house  books  the  only  objects  of 
curiosity  in  the  place  that  I  was  not  readily  permitted  to  inspect.  The  history  of  its  rise 
and  progress  exhibits  an  example  of  activity,  of  daring  speculation  and  adventure,  and  of 
sudden  and  magnificent  success,  that  is  without  a  parallel.  The  first  dock  was  constructed 
here  in  1710,  at  which  time  the  number  of  vessels  belonging  to  the  port  amounted  only  to 
eighty-four,  averaging  rather  less  than  seventy  tons  burthen,  and  navigated  by  eleven 

men 


94  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

men  each.  These  were  principally  employed  in  the  Irish  trade,  which  was  the  earliest 
commerce  of  any  importance  possessed  by  Liverpool;  and  which,  on  the  decline  of  the 
port  of  Chester,  became  very  considerable,  and  drew  over  to  this  town  many  natives  of 
Ireland,  who  laid  the  first  foundation  of  some  of  its  principal  mercantile  houses.  Soon 
after  this  time  the  first  efforts  were  made  in  foreign  commerce,  and  some  successful 
attempts  in  the  West-India  and  American  markets  quickened  the  enterprize  and  con- 
fidence of  the  people,  and  called  forth  all  their  resources.  They  exported  provisions  from 
Ireland,  and  procured  checks,  handkerchiefs,  and  osnaburghs,  for  the  ordinary  demands 
of  the  plantations,  from  Scotland ;  and  these,  with  other  goods  of  secondary  import- 
ance, with  which  they  freighted  their  vessels,  gave  them  a  small  share  in  that  extensive 
and  lucrative  trade,  which  was  carried  on  by  the  more  opulent  sea-ports  of  the  kingdom 
with  America  and  the  West-Indies.  By  these  exertions,  the  shipping  of  the  port  was 
rapidly  increased;  the  number  of  vessels  in  1716,  being  113,  amounting  to  8,386  tons;  and 
navigated  by  1,3?6  men. 

The  emulation  of  Liverpool  had  been  excited  at  an  early  period  of  her  commercial 
adventures,  by  the  prosperity  of  the  port  of  Bristol ;  and  an  opportunity  was  now 
approaching,  not  only  for  her  rivalling,  but  outdoing  her  ancient  superior.  The  manufac- 
tures of  Manchester,  which  about  this  time  were  wonderfully  improved,  were  the  grand 
means  of  advancing  the  consequence  of  this  port.  The  Manchester  manufacturers, 
conceiving  that  they  could  supply  the  foreign  markets  with  articles  of  a  better  quality,  and 
at  a  cheaper  rate,  than  those  procured  by  Liverpool  from  Scotland,  determined  to  make  a 
trial  of  exportation.  The  experiment  succeeded  to  their  utmost  hopes ;  and  in  a  very 
short  time,  the  checks,  osnaburghs,  and  handkerchiefs  of  Manchester  obtained  such  a 
preference,  that  Liverpool  acquired  a  complete  monopoly  of  coarse  goods  in  the  West- 
India  market.  The  French,  German,  and  Scotch  manufactures  of  this  description  fell 
into  disrepute ;  and  the  trade  of  Bristol  in  these  commodities  was  utterly  and  irredeemably 
ruined.  The  town  of  Liverpool  was  now  rising  into  some  importance;  the  population 
by  a  computation  made  in  1?20,  amounting  to  10,446,  having  been  more  than  doubled 
since  the  commencement  of  the  century.  In  the  same  year  an  act  was  passed,  for  making 
navigable  the  rivers  Mersey  and  Irwell,  as  far  as  Manchester;  and  for  opening  a  commu- 
nication with  Northwich,  by  means  of  the  river  Weaver. 

The  town,  however,  had  yet  no  promise  of  that  extraordinary  elevation  which  awaited 
it,  when  a  new  outlet  was  made  for  its  grand  commodities,  the  manufactures  of  Manchester, 
by  a  contraband  trade  with  Spanish  America,  which  was  followed  by  splendid  success, 
and  returned  to  the  town  that  vast  capital,  which  gave  it  such  command  and  power  in  its 
future  speculations,  and  advanced  it  to  the  rank  which  it  now  holds.  The  goods  exported  by 
Spain  to  her  American  colonies  were  charged  with  most  exorbitant  duties ;  and  the  Cales 
company  (who,  by  virtue  of  their  charter,  claimed  the  exclusive  privilege  of  exportation), 
paying  also  a  yearly  tribute  to  the  Spanish  government,  every  article  in  their  invoice,  on 

its 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  9 

its  arrival  at  the  American  settlements,  was  rated  at  more  than  three  hundred  per  cent, 
beyond  what  the  inhabitants  had  been  accustomed  to  pay  when  the  trade  was  open.  Such 
imposts  amounted  almost  to  a  prohibition  against  all  purchasers,  and  were  admirably 
calculated  to  encourage  smugglers,  who,  accordingly,  soon  began  to  make  adventures  in 
small  craft,  from  the  Havannah,  Porto- Bello,  Carthagena,  and  many  small  ports  and  creeks 
on  the  main,  to  Jamaica;  in  the  hope  of  procuring  checks,  stripes,  and  other  articles  of 
this  description  on  somewhat  more  moderate  terms  than  they  could  be  supplied  with  them 
from  the  German  looms,  under  such  duties  as  it  pleased  the  wisdom  of  the  Spanish 
government  to  impose.  They  found  with  great  satisfaction,  that  the  goods  were  not 
only  immensely  cheaper,  but  of  a  better  quality  than  those  which  they  had  been  ac- 
customed to  purchase ;  and  the  news  of  this  fact  speedily  so  multiplied  adventurers,  and 
extended  the  demand  for  the  goods,  that  on  the  departure  of  the  Spaniards,  there  was 
sometimes  not  a  single  piece  of  check  left  for  sale  in  the  Kingston  market.  The  returns 
were  made  to  this  country  in  specie;  and  gave  to  the  merchants  of  Liverpool,  and  the 
manufacturers  of  Manchester,  fortunes  more  vast  and  sudden,  than  the  history  of  any 
trade,  or  of  any  town  in  the  kingdom,  can  furnish  instances  of.  By  this  contraband  trade 
it  is  said  that  there  were  annually  sold  British  manufactured  goods  to  the  amount  of  a 
million  and  a  half  of  money.  It  continued  in  full  vigour  from  the  year  1722  to  1740; 
when  it  was  crippled  by  the  vigilance  of  the  Spanish  government,  and  gradually  declined 
till  it  was  finally  abolished  by  an  act  of  the  British  legislature. 

Previous,  however,  to  the  stoppage  of  this  golden  flood,  Liverpool  had  opened  a  new 
source  of  wealth  in  the  slave-trade,  the  only  discreditable  and  disgusting  topic  that  presents 
itself,  in  tracing  the  causes  of  its  elevation  and  prosperity.  Her  first  attempts  in  this  savage 
business  were  in  a  contraband  trade  with  the  Spaniards.  On  the  failure  of  the  South-sea 
scheme,  the  contractors  were  unable  to  fulfil  their  engagements  with  the  Assiento  Com- 
pany ;  and  their  incompetency  presented  a  promising  opening,  which  encouraged  the 
merchants  of  Liverpool  to  embark  in  the  trade.  They  met  with  immediate  success,  and 
had  soon  a  regular  establishment  of  factors  in  Jamaica;  from  whence  they  smuggled  over 
their  slaves  to  the  Spanish  settlements.  Those  for  which  they  could  not  find  a  timely  and 
profitable  market  with  the  Spaniards  were  detained  on  the  island,  and  contributed  to 
satisfy  the  occasional  demands  of  the  Jamaica  planters.  Extending  their  concerns  still 
further,  they  had  soon  a  share  in  the  general  supply  of  the  British  plantations,  and  such  was 
their  activity,  that  they  were  not  long  before  they  were  without  a  rival  in  this  great  branch 
of  the  trade.  Bristol,  which  once  almost  engrossed  the  supply  of  our  own  plantations,  felt 
her  exports  most  extraordinarily  reduced,  as  Liverpool  advanced  in  the  trade,  clearing  out 
in  1764  only  thirty-two  ships  for  the  coast  of  Africa;  while  the  latter  port  cleared  out  seventy- 
four.  So  ardent  was  Liverpool  in  the  prosecution  of  this  infernal  traffic,  and  to  such  a 
height  had  she  carried  it,  that  at  the  period  of  its  fullest  prosperity  more  than  one  fourth 

of 


96 


VOYAGE    ItOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 


of  the  shipping  belonging  to  her  port  sailed  to  the  coast  of  Africa ;  and  she  had  more  than 
one  half  of  the  African  trade  of  the  whole  kingdom. 

That  she  has  derived  great  wealth  from  this  trade  is  not  to  be  disputed  ;  but  it  may 
be  questioned  whether  it  did  not  divert  her  capital  and  her  industry  from  more  profitable, 
as  well  as  more  just  and  honourable  concerns.  Certain  it  is,  that  its  abolition  did  not  do 
her  that  injury,  which  those  who  considered  the  question  without  any  reference  to  justice 
and  morality  were  willing  to  apprehend.  Ships  from  every  trading  nation  are  now  seen 
in  her  docks;  and  she  shares,  as  the  second  sea-port  of  the  empire,  in  all  those  advantages 
which  the  perfection  of  our  manufactures,  the  extent  of  our  colonial  territories,  and  the 
ascendancy  of  our  navy,  have  secured  to  the  country.  It  is  estimated,  that  one-twelfth  part 
of  the  shipping  of  Great  Britain  is  navigated  by  Liverpool ;  that  it  has  one-fourth  part  of 
her  foreign  trade,  and  one-sixth  part  of  her  general  commerce*.  It  has  every  promise  of 

*  The  following  table  of  dock  duties  will  show  the  rapid  progress  of  commerce  in  this  town.     No  later  list  has 
been  published  ;  but  the  annual  amount  of  the  duties  at  present  is,  I  believe,  about  ,£'70,000. 


No. 
Shipt. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

Year. 

No. 
Shipt. 

£, 

t. 

J. 

— 

1776 

8 

2 

1776 

22)6 

5064 

10 

10 



2034 

16 

2 

1777 

2361 

4610 

4 

9 

• 

2095 

11 

0 

1778 

2292 

4649 

7 

7 



2417 

13 

11 

1779 

2374 

4957 

17 

10 



2187 

16 

9 

178O 

2261 

3528 

7 

9 

1371 

2336 

15 

o 

1781 

2512 

3015 

4 

11 

1453 

2403 

6 

3 

J782 

24y6 

4249 

6 

3 

1281 

2372 

12 

2 

1783 

2816 

4840 

8 

3 

1245 

2330 

6 

7 

1784 

3098 

6597 

11 

1 

1319 

2382 

O 

2 

1785 

3429 

8411 

5 

3 

1307 

2526 

19 

6 

1786 

3228 

7508 

0 

1 

1752 

3141 

1 

5 

1787 

3567 

9199 

18 

8 

1625 

2780 

3 

4 

1788 

3677 

9206 

13 

10 

1930 

3455 

8 

4 

1789 

3619 

8901 

10 

10 

1808 

3653 

19 

2 

1790 

4223 

10037 

6 

2; 

1704 

3615 

9 

2 

1791 

4O45 

11645 

6 

6 

1808 

3566 

14 

9 

1792 

4483 

13243 

17 

8i 

2O54 

4004 

5 

0 

1793 

4129 

12480 

S 

5 

2O?3 

4142 

17 

2 

1794 

4265 

10678 

7 

0 

2087 

4203 

19 

10 

1795 

3948 

9368 

16 

4 

22S9 

4552 

5 

4 

1796 

4738 

12377 

7 

7 

2214 

4725 

1 

11 

1797 

4528 

13319 

12 

8 

2258 

4580 

5 

5 

)798 

4473 

12057 

18 

3 

2291 

5384 

4 

9 

1799 

4518 

14049 

15 

1 

Year. 

Ships. 

Tonnage. 

£. 

I. 

d. 

1800 

4746 

450,060 

23379 

13 

Of 

1801 

5060 

459,719 

28365 

8 

2 

1802 

4781 

510,691 

28192 

9 

10 

18O3 

4791 

494,531 

28027 

13 

7 

1804 

4291 

448,761 

26157 

O 

11 

1805 

4618 

463,482 

33364 

13 

i 

1806 

4676 

507,825 

44560 

7 

3f 

1807 

5791 

662,309 

62831 

5 

10 

1808 

5225 

516,836 

40638 

10 

4 

1809 

6023 

594,601 

47580 

19 

3 

1810 

6729 

734,391 

65782 

1 

Oi 

maintaining 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  97 

maintaining  its  rank,  as  long  as  commerce  is  permitted  to  keep  a  place  in  the  country. 
The  unrivalled  cotton  manufactures  of  the  county  in  which  it  is  situated  give  it  a  great 
preponderance  in  the  trade  with  the  United  States;  a  mart  of  high  consideration  at 
present,  and  undoubtedly  the  most  important  empire  of  the  world,  in  the  speculations  of 
future  commerce. 

Liverpool,  from  its  local  situation,  commands  a  large  proportion  of  the  home  trade 
of  the  country.  It  secures  the  east  and  north  coast  of  Ireland,  from  Dublin  to  London- 
derry; the  north  of  England,  and  the  midland  counties,  extending  southwards  as  far  as 
Birmingham.  By  its  connexion  with  the  inland  navigation,  it  has  an  easy  communication, 
not  only  with  the  great  depots  of  its  merchandise  in  Lancashire,  but  with  the  most  distant 
parts  of  England.  The  Mersey  and  Irwell  connect  its  trade  with  that  of  Manchester. 
Sugar,  grain,  wine,  and  spirits,  together  with  the  produce  from  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  Baltic,  are  sent  up;  and  manufactured  goods  from  Manchester  and  all  parts  of 
Yorkshire  are  returned.  By  the  river  Weaver  it  has  a  communication  with  the  heart 
of  Cheshire,  from  whence  it  receives  salt,  cheese  and  grain,  in  large  quantities.  By  this 
channel,  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  thousand  tons  of  salt  are  annually  transported  to 
Liverpool,  and  from  thence  sent  coastways  to  our  various  fisheries.  The  Duke  of  Bridge- 
water's  Canal  falls  into  the  Mersey,  and  communicates  with  the  Birmingham,  Staffordshire, 
and  Grand  Trunk,  to  London.  The  vessels  employed  upon  it  carry  clay  and  flint  to  the 
potteries,  and  West-India  and  other  foreign  goods  to  various  parts  of  the  island  ;  returning 
to  this  port  with  the  produce  and  manufactures  of  all  the  midland  counties,  and  the  south 
of  England.  The  Leeds  Canal,  it  is  intended,  shall  unite  Liverpool  and  Hull,  and  open  a 
channel  to  the  German  Ocean.  By  this  canal,  Liverpool  receives  a  hundred  and  forty 
thousand  tons  of  coal  annually  from  Wigan ;  and,  when  completed,  it  will  carry  her  imports 
all  over  Yorkshire.  The  Ellesmere  Canal  opens  a  passage  from  the  Mersey  to  the  Dee, 
connecting  the  trade  of  this  port  with  North  Wales,  through  the  western  part  of  Cheshire. 
The  principal  goods  imported  by  this  channel  are  lead,  iron,  and  timber,  from  Wales. 
I  regret  that  I  must  leave  with  so  little  notice  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  exports  and 
imports  of  the  place;  but,  as  I  have  before  mentioned,  I  had  not  the  liberty  of  access  to 
the  only  sources  of  certain  information  on  the  subject. 

I  found  an  abundance  of  matter  at  Liverpool  to  occupy  me  fully  and  pleasantly,  during 
a  week  of  observation ;  but  my  friend  had  exhausted  all  that  it  presented  of  the  picturesque 
in  a  much  shorter  time,  and  had  proceeded  on  his  tour,  trusting  that  I  should  overtake 
him  where  there  were  more  temptations  for  him  to  pause.  My  journey,  for  an  extent  of 
many  leagues  to  the  northward  of  Liverpool,  was  very  dull  and  barren  ;  and,  that  I  may 
give  the  reader  as  little  fatigue  as  possible  in  following  me,  I  will  make  but  few  pages  of 
the  many  tedious  miles  that  I  had  now  to  drone  over.  The  whole  coast  of  Lancashire  is, 
with  little  variation,  a  range  of  sand-hills ;  with  a  flat  shore,  from  which  the  sea  retires  to  a 
great  distance  at  low  water.  The  land  has  evidently  suffered  much  from  the  encroach- 
VOL.  ii.  o  ments 


98  VOV'AGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

ments  of  the  sea,  which  still  advances ;  but  the  great  quantities  of  sand  brought  down  by 
the  rivers  which  intersect  the  coast  operate  in  some  degree  as  a  check  upon  it.  The  sand- 
hills are  planted  with  sea-berit,  the  elymus  arenarius,  I  believe,  of  botanists,  whose  long 
creeping  roots  bind  the  sand  together ;  but  it  is  frequently  forced  up  by  the  strong  south- 
west gales,  and  strewed  over  the  cultivated  fields,  doing  infinite  mischief, 

There  might  be  some  who  would  reproach  me,  were  I  in  my  haste  to  pass  by  Bootle 
without  notice :  I  therefore  mention,  that  it  lies  about  three  miles  north  of  Liverpool ; 
and  that  there  is  a  boarding-house  there,  which,  like  all  these  kind  of  places  at  the  sea-side, 
I  found  full  to  the  very  garrets.  A  man  here,  with  a  good  spy-glass,  may  find  amusement 
enough  in  counting  and  classing  the  great  crowd  of  vessels  that  are  constantly  passing  and 
repassing  on  the  river;  and  for  the  ladies, who  do  not  care  about  great  ships,  and  love  smooth 
water,  here  is  the  Wigan  Canal,  a  stone's  throw  from  the  house,  with  a  steady,  safe-going 
packet,  finely  painted  and  fitted  up,  in  which  they  may  ride  to  Liverpool  and  return  on  the 
same  day;  would  1  could  have  said  to  dinner,  and  the  matter  would  then  have  been 
perfect ; — but  what  is  there  perfect  in  this  world  ? 

On  proceeding  from  this  place  along  the  shore,  I  had  little  for  some  time  to  mind  but 
my  walking.  The  sand-hills  shut  out  all  view  of  the  interior ;  and  on  ascending  to  the 
top  of  one  of  them,  I  discovered  that  I  had  not  rrmrh  to  regret  on  this  account.  The 
country  as  far  as  I  could  see  was  quite  flat,  not  altogether  uninteresting,  for  it  was  thickly 
peopled  with  villages  and  farms,  but  without  any  beauties  of  natural  scenery.  It  produces 
corn,  and  an  abundance  of  potatoes  of  the  finest  kind.  Potatoes,  it  is  said,  will  grow  well 
in  any  soil ;  but  I  have  seldom  met  with  them  so  good  any  where  as  in  Lancashire.  They 
form  a  principal  article  of  food  with  the  lower  order  of  people  in  this  county,  and  great 
attention  is  paid  to  their  growth,  and  all  necessary  rules  are  observed  in  boiling  them ;  and 
these,  some  have  ventured  to  affirm,  are  all  that  is  wanting  to  make  all  potatoes  alike. 
But  this  appears  to  be  going  rather  too  far,  otherwise  an  English  potatoe,  unless  spoilt  in 
the  saucepan,  would  be  as  good  as  an  Irish  one ; — and  who  could  be  taught  to  think  so  ? 

A  walk  of  eight  or  ten  miles  brought  me  to  Formby  Point,  a  ridge  of  sand  jutting  into  the 
sea,  at  the  extreme  point  of  which  is  a  beacon,  which  acts,  with  another  a  little  further  in- 
land, as  a  guide  through  Formby  Channel,  one  of  the  passages  into  the  Mersey.  A  little 
south  of  the  point,  a  very  small  river,  the  Alt,  flows  into  the  sea,  and  is  navigable  for  a  few 
hundred  yards  from  its  mouth  for  vessels  of  fifty  or  sixty  tons.  I  observed  on  the  shore 
here,  which  was  left  dry  by  the  tide,  an  evidence  of  the  depredations  committed  by  the 
sea,  in  a  considerable  tract  of  peat-moss,  in  which  appeared  sticking  up  in  various  places 
the  black  roots  and  trunks  of  trees.  These  were  certainly  of  great  antiquity,  for  they  were 
the  remains  of  much  larger  trees  than  modern  art  can  rear  on  this  coast,  in  the  face  of  the 
western  wind. 

I  now  turned  from  the  shore,  and  proceeding  for  about  a  mile  and  a  half  inland, 
arrived  at  the  village  of  Formby,  sheltered  by  a  few  stunted  and  weather-beaten  trees, 

which, 


Liverpool,  taken  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  River 


Lancaster  Castle 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BBITAIN.  99 

which,  in  a  neighbourhood  generally  so  bare  of  wood,  were  something  to  boast  of.  It  was 
not  meat-day,  but  there  was  bacon  for  me  here,  which,  with  a  comfortable  night's  lodging, 
I  was  in  no  temper  to  find  fault  with.  In  the  morning  I  returned  to  the  shore,  over  a 
waste  of  sand-hills,  on  a  scale  of  such  grandeur,  and  covering  such  an  extent  of  ground, 
that,  familiarized  as  I  was  with  sand,  the  effect  was  something  novel  to  me.  They  extended 
for  at  least  a  mile  in  depth ;  and  were  thrown  into  very  striking  groups,  exactly  resem- 
bling a  range  of  mountains,  with  all  their  ridges,  peaks,  and  precipices.  Many  of  them 
were  full  sixty  feet  in  height,  rising  precipitously  on  all  sides.  They  were  all  very  thinly 
sprinkled  with  the  sea-bent,  and  exhibited  a  scene  of  frightful  and  irredeemable  barrenness, 
that,  together  with  the  wild  confusion  with  which  they  were  grouped  and  heaped  together, 
had  something  in  it  almost  amounting  to  the  sublime.  I  found  it  no  easy  matter  to  find 
my  way  among  them,  being  obliged  to  wind  through  the  spaces  between  them  ;  for  to 
scramble  over  them  would  have  been  a  task  for  a  week,  not  to  mention  the  risk  of  being 
buried  alive.  Along  the  shore,  above  high-water  mark,  there  is  a  prodigious  accumulation 
of  loose,  dry  sand,  which  is  continually  driving  into  the  interior.  It  is  impossible  to  arrest 
it  by  vegetation  ;  for  the  grass  would  be  overwhelmed  by  fresh  heaps  on  every  breeze 
from  the  sea.  A  hard  Avind  was  now  blowing  from  the  westward  ;  and  the  shore,  which 
was  left  dry  for  a  breadth  of  more  than  a  mile,  was  covered  with  a  cloud  of  loose  sand, 
about  a  foot  high,  which  seemed  to  rise  from  it  like  smoke.  I  found  no  inconvenience 
from  it,  beyond  a  cake  incrusted  over  my  shins ;  but  a  poor  dog,  belonging  to  a  country- 
man who  had  joined  company  with  me,  could  make  no  head  at  all  against  the  driving 
shower,  and  after  a  gallant  struggle,  was  fairly  obliged  to  turn  his  tail  to  it,  and  run  for 
the  land. 

The  sands  are  very  hard  and  even,  so  that  a  pedestrian,  in  spite  of  the  dreariness 
of  the  prospects,  may  have  some  satisfaction  at  least,  in  the  smoothness  of  his  path,  though 
the  miles  are  exceedingly  tedious,  and  seem  to  be  lengthened  out  to  more  than  double 
their  lawful  extent.  Distant  objects  appear  most  fallaciously  near  to  the  sight  on  this  flat 
shore ;  and  one  walks  in  wonder  and  impatience  for  an  hour,  without  gaining  a  point 
which  the  eye  had  assured  him  was  to  be  reached  in  less  than  half  the  time.  I  did  at 
length  arrive  at  some  bathing-machines,  which  I  had  for  some  time  suspected  of  retreating 
as  I  advanced,  and  paused  for  rest  at  Southport,  where  an  exhibition  of  human  art  and 
taste  burst  upon  my  view,  that  in  so  desolate  a  scene  of  nature  had  an  extraordinary  effect. 
Amidst  a  waste  of  sand-hills,  here  are  planted  about  a  dozen  houses,  all  fitted  up  in  that 
peculiar  style  of  natural  and  simple  embellishment,  which  we  sometimes  see,  but  oftener 
read  of,  in  the  villa  of  a  citizen,  within  a  morning's  walk  of  his  shop  in  town.  The  sand 
does  not  encourage  any  thing  to  grow ;  but  here  are  little  gardens,  marked  out  by  green 
and  white  palings,  which,  instead  of  flowers  and  shrubs,  are  ornamented  with  spoils  from 
wrecks,  pieces  of  carved  and  painted  work,  figure-heads,  huge  Neptunes,  and  overgrown 
Tritons,  which,  inclosed  in  those  small  spaces,  remind  one  of  Gulliver  in  Lilliput. 

o  2  Nothing 


100  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Nothing  that  paint  can  give  of  splendour  and  diversity  of  appearance  has  been  spared  on 
the  outsides  of  the  houses,  and  there  are  few  windows  not  latticed,  or  not  opening  into  a 
balcony,  in  which  one  person  at  least  may  stand  at  a  time,  and  at  his  ease,  to  see  the  sand. 
The  place  was  founded  exclusively  for  the  accommodation  of  bathers,  and,  as  far  as  was 
compatible  with  the  ruggedness  of  the  ground,  every  thing  has  been  made  pretty  to  please 
the  company.  A  small  drain,  which  I  hopped  over  on  quitting  the  shore,  I  found  was  called 
the  Nile,  and  was  made,  I  believe,  on  purpose  to  be  so  called.  Every  thing,  in  short,  that 
could  be  reasonably  expected,  has  been  provided  for  the  indulgence  of  visitors  who  come 
hither  with  fine  taste  and  romantic  feelings ;  and  if  a  contrivance  could  be  discovered, 
as  the  host  of  the  inn  observed,  to  make  the  sand  look  green,  and  keep  it  out  of  the  par- 
lours, a  person  might  travel  very  far  indeed  without  seeing  any  thing  like  Southport. 

The  situation  is  as  disagreeable  as  possible;  a  windy  day  smothering  you  with  sand, 
and  a  calm  one  suffocating  you  with  heat.  I  never  felt  the  heat  so  oppressive,  I  think, 
as  here.  When  out  of  doors  there  is  no  quarter;  all  is  open  and  exposed,  without  a  tree 
or  a  bush  to  fly  to  for  shade,  or  to  look  at  and  think  of  it :  the  eye  has  nothing  to  select 
and  discriminate,  but  dwells  by  force,  dazzled  and  strained,  on  an  unvaried  breadth  of  sea, 
sun,  and  sand. 

I  could  procure  no  chaise,  nor  horse,  nor  any  kind  of  conveyance  here  to  help  me  on 
my  journey,  except  a  cart,  and  this  did  not  travel  in  the  course  that  I  wished  to  pursue. 
The  visitors  are  trundled  away  from  hence  in  this  humble  vehicle  to  the  Wigan  canal, 
where  they  meet  a  packet-boat  to  take  them  to  Wigan  or  Liverpool ;  and  if  a  man  be  not 
bound  to  either  of  these  places,  he  must  walk  away  or  stay,  unless  he  fortunately  wishes 
to  be  ferried  over  the  Kibble,  and  is  not,  as  I  was,  just  ten  minutes  behind  the  proper 
time  of  tide. 

Resolving  not  to  stay,  I  renewed  my  expedition,  ploughing  my  way  for  several  miles 
up  to  the  knees  in  hot  sand ;  the  thermometer,  I  had  no  doubt,  almost  high  enough  to 
drive  a  man  mad.  At  the  village  of  Church-town,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Kibble,  I  was 
relieved  by  a  paved  road,  which  made  my  journey  less  burthensome  to  myself,  though 
combined  with  little  that  can  render  it  more  lively  to  my  readers.  The  Kibble,  which  is 
one  of  the  largest  rivers  in  the  north  of  England,  forms  an  estuary  several  miles  in  breadth, 
but,  from  the  interruption  of  banks,  navigable  only  for  small  vessels.  I  could  see  no 
water  now  in  any  part  of  the  channel,  though  the  sand,  from  an  effect  of  the  mirage,  had 
very  much  the  appearance  of  it,  looking  white  and  somewhat  transparent,  and  trembling 
and  flashing  under  the  sun,  like  a  lake.  The  land  on  the  opposite  shore  appeared  broken 
into  fragments,  not  unlike  a  fleet  of  ships  and  boats,  but  seemingly  lifted  up  into  the  air, 
and  continually  in  a  state  of  tremulous  motion.  I  could  not  have  quite  mistaken  the 
sand  for  water  on  this  day,  but  the  deception,  I  have  been  told,  is  often  observed  more 
complete ;  and  a  story  is  familiar  in  this  neighbourhood  of  a  man  who  was  so  far  misled 
by  it,  that  he  actually  stripped  off  his  clothes  to  bathe,  and  found  himself  sprawling  on 

the 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  101 

the  dry  sand  before  he  was  convinced  of  his  error.     Of  course  this  man  kept  no  account 
of  the  tides. 

Leaving  the  sea-shore,  I  followed  the  course  of  the  Kibble,  which,  for  an  extent  of 
six  or  seven  miles,  is  bounded  by  a  .dreary  tract  of  marsh  land,  in  parts  yielding  pasture, 
but  generally  very  barren  and  unprofitable.  As  I  advanced  further  into  the  interior,  the 
country  assumed  a  richer  and  more  cheerful  aspect ;  but  being  out  of  sight  of  salt  water, 
it  becomes  me  to  pass  it  by  without  more  particular  description.  The  impossibility  of 
crossing  the  Ribble,  or  of  waiting  with  nothing  else  to  do  till  the  tide  flowed,  led  me  on 
to  Preston,  where,  after  a  walk  of  twenty  miles,  my  difficulties  were  relieved  by  a  bridge. 

Having  no  business,  and  finding  little  amusement  at  this  town,  I  continued  my  journey, 
on  the  following  day,  along  the  north  bank  of  the  river,  passing  over  several  fine  marshes 
of  great  extent  and  fertility.  About  two  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  estuary,  the  shore 
is  defended  by  a  deep  bed  of  beach,  which  struck  me  as  singular,  for  the  country  for 
several  miles  inland  is  quite  flat,  and  covered  with  a  thick  stratum  of  soil.  The  beach  is 
composed  chiefly  of  pebbles  of  granite,  and  continues  for  ten  or  twelve  miles  along  the 
coast  to  the  northward  of  the  Ribble,  when  it  is  cut  off  by  Wyre-water,  and  does  not 
appear  again  to  the  northward  of  that  river.  Granite  appears  on  the  mountains  of  Cum- 
berland and  Westmoreland ;  but  they  lie  at  a  great  distance  from  this  beach,  which  con- 
tains likewise  large  quantities  of  pebbles,  of  too  large  a  size,  one  should  think,  to  have 
been  borne  down  by  any  rivers  on  this  coast.  There  seems,  however,  to  be  no  way  of 
accounting  for  their  appearance  here,  but  by  supposing  that  they  were  washed  down  from 
the  mountains;  and,  for  the  sake  of  a  quiet  mind  on  the  subject,  I  must  submit  to  such 
a  conjecture. 

I  stopped  for  refreshment  at  Lytham,  a  small  watering-place,  nearly  opposite  to 
Southport,  but  without  figure-heads,  or  any  other  kind  of  finery,  such  as  distinguishes 
that  chosen  spot.  The  few  vessels  that  trade  to  the  Ribble  discharge  their  cargoes  here; 
the  channel  of  the  river  being  close  to  the  shore,  and  furnishing  a  tolerable  harbour. 
Corn,  butter,  &c.  are  imported  from  Dublin,  and  linen  from  Belfast:  the  exports  are 
principally  coals. 

Behind  Lytham  is  a  handsome  mansion,  the  seat  of  Mr.  Clifton,  who,  by  an  exertion 
of  great  art  and  labour,  has  worked  a  very  agreeable  spot  out  of  a  most  unpromising  situa- 
tion. Among  other  embellishments,  he  has  covered  his  grounds  with  trees,  which,  though 
of  no  stately  growth,  have  a  striking  effect,  amidst  the  general  nakedness  of  this  part  of 
the  countr}7.  A  traveller  hunting  for  beautiful  scenery  may  feel  somewhat  indignant  at 
agriculturists  here,  who  see  acre  extended  after  acre  without  a  tree ;  but  they  have  some 
reason  when  they  object  to  the  culture  of  trees,  as  too  costly  and  tedious  an  operation  to 
answer  the  ends  of  ordinary  husbandry.  Trees  cannot  be  raised  on  this  coast  of  a  size 
to  be  valuable  as  timber;  and  it  is  but  few  who  can  afford  to  plant  only  with  a  view  to 
ornament. 

To 


102  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

To  the  northward  of  Mr.  Clifton's  grounds  a  dull,  naked  flat  extends  along  the  coast, 
and  continues  without  variation  to  Blackpool.  I  arrived  at  this  place  on  a  very  wild 
evening :  the  wind  blew  loud,  and  a  dark  and  stormy  sky  threw  a  deep  shade  over  the 
sea,  which  was  bursting,  in  long  lines  of  roaring  breakers,  upon  the  shore.  Fancy  might 
have  found  room  in  such  a  picture  for  ships  in  distress,  and  fishermens'  boats  just  disco- 
vered through  the  dusk  and  the  foam  of  the  sea ;  but  such  images  were  driven  from  my 
mind  by  a  gay  throng  of  ladies  and  gentlemen,  lining  the  beach  in  their  parade  dresses, 
and  enjoying  the  storm.  No  shrieks  or  groans  of  distress  were  heard  in  the  pauses  of  the 
blast;  but  various  expressions  of  pretty  wonder  and  innocent  daring,  from  ladies  who 
freely  scudded  before  the  wind,  or  stood  at  the  water's  edge  amidst  the  mist  of  the 
breakers.  Instead  of  sails  splitting,  and  ropes  snapping  in  the  gale,  here  were  seen  mus- 
lins and  silks  of  every  colour  fluttering  in  the  wind,  at  the  risk  of  no  ruder  or  more  afflict- 
ing accident  than  the  occasional  discovery  of  a  thick  leg  or  a  darned  stocking.  A  fine 
evening  had  seen  the  same  company  pacing  to  and  fro  silent  and  serenely  dull ;  but  this 
rough  wind  broke  down  all  kind  of  ceremony,  and  utterly  confounded  the  two-and-two 
order  of  the  procession,  blowing  about  the  parties  into  ever-shifting  groups,  and  creating 
a  concert  of  noise  and  sprightliness,  such  as  I  have  seldom  witnessed  within  the  bounds  of 
a  dress-walk. 

Blackpool  is  the  favourite  bathing-place  of  the  county,  and  it  is  certainly  the  best 
situated  ;  a  bolder  and  more  unbroken  expanse  of  sea  rolling  in  upon  this  particular  point 
than  is  to  be  seen  any  where  else  upon  this  sand-bound  coast.  Among  the  company  are 
crowds  of  poor  people  from  the  manufacturing  towns,  who  have  a  high  opinion  of  the 
efficacy  of  bathing,  maintaining  that  in  the  months  of  August  and  September  there  is 
physic  in  the  sea, — physic  of  a  most  comprehensive  description,  combining  all  the  virtues 
of  all  the  drugs  in  the  doctor's  shop,  and  of  course  a  cure  for  all  varieties  of  disease.  It  is 
not,  they  imagine,  any  peculiar  condition  of  their  own  systems,  in  the  months  I  have  men- 
tioned, that  gives  the  sea  its  effect  upon  them  ;  but  they  conceive  that  during  this  period  it 
is  actually  converted  into  a  great  dose,  by  the  admixture  of  some  ingredients  which  do  not 
belong  to  its  composition  at  other  seasons.  Their  meaning  is  perfectly  literal,  when  they 
say  that  there  is  physic  in  the  sea,  and  they  submit  altogether  to  a  very  rough  probation 
in  order  to  receive  the  full  benefit  of  it.  Most  of  them  come  hither  in  carts,  but  some 
will  walk  in  a  single  day  from  Manchester,  distant  more  than  forty  miles;  a  tolerable  kind 
of  trial  by  way  of  beginning,  for  they  rest  here  only  three  or  four  days,  and  in  each  of 
these  undergo  a  course  of  seasoning  quite  as  severe  as  that  of  the  first.  The  earliest  act 
of  the  morning  is  a  draught  of  salt-water,  a  quart,  and  sometimes  two,  which  is  followed, 
under  the  notion  of  fortifying  the  stomach,  by  an  equal  quantity  of  gin  and  beer.  This 
mixture  swallowed,  a  man  is  properly  prepared  for  the  bath,  in  which  he  continues  to 
paddle,  either  in  or  out  of  his  clothes,  for  the  remainder  of  the  day.  They  always  select 
a  spring-tide  for  the  time  of  their  visit,  when  the  water  has  most  strength  they  say ;  and 

three 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  103 

three  or  four  days  of  it  are  supposed  quite  enough  to  prove  the  utmost  effects  of  the 
physic,  and  they  are  generally  sufficient  to  empty  their  pockets.  They  bring  their  tea 
and  sugar  with  them,  and  pay  nine-pence  a  day  each  for  their  lodging. 

Their  accommodations  at  night  must  not  be  forgotten  in  the  account  of  their  toils 
and  difficulties.  A  single  house  here,  and  not  a  large  one,  frequently  receives  a  hundred 
and  twenty  people  to  sleep  in  a  night :  five  or  six  beds  are  crammed  into  each  room,  and 
five  or  six  people  into  each  bed ;  but,  with  every  art  of  packing  and  pinioning,  they  can- 
not all  be  stowed  at  one  time :  those,  therefore,  who  have  the  places  first  are  roused, 
when  they  have  slept  through  half  the  night,  to  make  way  for  another  load — and  thus 
every  one  gets  his  night's  rest.  A  small  cottage  was  shewn  me,  in  which  I  should  not 
have  supposed  there  was  more  than  comfortable  room  for  the  family  inhabiting  it ;  but 
which,  nevertheless,  I  was  told,  sometimes  mustered  fifty  sleepers  per  night.  Such  a  dose 
of  three  days,  when  considered  in  all  its  component  parts,  would  scarcely,  it  might  be 
imagined,  be  beneficial  to  any  one ;  but  the  people  must  derive  some  good  from  it,  or  they 
would  not  take  it  with  so  much  resolution  and  regularity.  An  occasional  riot,  that  does 
absolute  violence  to  every  part  of  the  body,  and  turns  the  whole  order  of  it  topsy-turvy, 
may  be  of  some  service  to  persons  leading  sedentary  lives ;  and  certainly  no  more  effectual 
plan  of  general  disturbance  can  be  conceived  than  the  annual  course  of  walking,  drink- 
ing, dipping,  and  lodging,  submitted  to  by  these  patient  manufacturers. 

The  appearance  of  the  beach  here  at  high  water  is  very  remarkable ;  and,  as  I  cast 
my  eye  along  it,  and  saw  it,  for  the  length  of  nearly  a  mile,  darkened  with  thick  clusters 
of  people,  full  of  motion,  and  continually  splashing  in  and  out  of  the  water,  it  brought  to 
my  mind  the  hosts  of  Puffins  at  Priestholme,  as  the  only  scene  of  life,  and  bustle,  and 
noise,  that  could  equal  it.  I  could  not  help  admiring  the  honest  confidence  with  which 
both  sexes,  among  the  lower  orders,  bathed  together,  as  if  really,  during  this  act  of 
immersion,  there  was  a  temporary  suspension  of  every  feeling  of  dignity  and  decorum, 
which,  for  the  most  part,  makes  breeches  and  petticoats  absolutely  necessary.  I  observed 
here,  and  it  was  a  novelty  to  me,  that  the  ladies  who  used  bathing-machines  yielded 
themselves  up  to  the  care  of  men-guides,  whose  strength,  I  was  informed,  was  often  found 
requisite  to  resist  the  boisterousness  of  the  sea  on  this  beach.  On  such  a  consideration  no 
one  could  object  to  their  interference ;  and  they  are,  moreover,  steady,  discreet  men,  who, 
from  long  familiarity  with  their  employment,  are  considered  as  fairly  naturalized  among 
the  ladies,  and  are  looked  upon  as  nothing  more  than  old  women. 

On  looking  at  the  crowd  without  doors,  one  might  be  puzzled  to  conceive  how  they 
could  possibly  be  lodged  within,  unless  he  were  acquainted  with  that  admirable  economy 
of  space  that  is  practised  in  the  disposal  of  the  poorer  people.  There  are  four  or  five 
boarding-houses  for  the  politer  part  of  the  company,  and  even  in  these  a  system  of  packing 
is  adopted,  that  is  quite  as  much  as  can  be  patiently  borne  by  one  accustomed  to  any  thing 
more  private  than  five  in  a  bed.  I  dined  at  one  of  them,  in  company  with  nearly  a  hun- 
dred 


104  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

dred  persons,  who  must  certainly  have  slept  in  families.  People  live  here,  in  every  respect, 
on  very  familiar  terms.  They  meet  regularly  five  times  every  day,  in  full  concert,  to  eat 
together ;  and  a  general  sense  of  friendliness  and  fellowship  springs  from  this  community 
of  wholesome  indulgences,  that  renders  them  little  fastidious  about  the  division  of  their 
rooms  at  night. 

The  amusements  of  the  place  are  rather  circumscribed,  consisting  principally  of  the 
invariable  custom  that  I  have  mentioned  of  five  meals  a  day.  After  dinner  and  supper, 
the  task  of  providing  entertainment  for  the  company  falls  upon  Mr.  President  and  Mr. 
Vice ;  who,  if  they  are  worthy  of  their  places,  do  not  suffer  an  individual  to  escape  without 
the  contribution  of  a  song,  a  toast,  or  a  sentiment.  Very  frequently  indeed  a  strenuous 
contest  takes  place  between  them  and  some  unfortunate  individual,  who,  somehow  or 
other,  in  spite  of  himself,  has  got  the  credit  of  singing  a  good  song,  and  whose  excuses 
and  apologies  have  not  the  slightest  effect  upon  his  inexorable  persecutors.  The  gentle- 
man is  knocked  down  for  a  song,  says  Mr.  President,  and  this  well-chosen  phrase,  as  well  as 
his  whole  manner,  clearly  proves  that  he  gives  no  quarter.  If  the  song  should  not  come 
at  last,  the  struggle  for  it  equally  answers  the  general  object  of  the  company,  that  of 
**  giving  time  a  shove/'  A  song  was  very  freely  given  at  the  time  I  was  present,  which 
drove  all  the  ladies  from  the  table ;  and  I  was  sorry  to  find  that  the  gentleman  was  not 
driven  out  too,  but  suffered,  and  not  without  some  sympathy  from  his  neighbours,  to 
chuckle  and  hug  himself  on  the  excellence  of  his  joke.  To  have  knocked  this  fellow  down 
for  his  song  would  have  done  some  credit  to  the  knuckles  of  the  president. 

The  shore  here,  for  an  extent  of  two  or  three  miles,  is  bounded  by  a  marl  bank,  which, 
in  places,  rises  to  the  height  of  fifty  feet.  It  is  a  very  insecure  barrier  against  the  sea, 
which  now  rapidly  encroaches  upon  it,  and  has  committed  such  alarming  depredations  in 
front  of  the  houses  of  Blackpool,  that  there  is  reason  to  apprehend  the  speedy  downfall  of 
the  place.  Some  attempts  have  been  made  to  block  out  the  enemy,  by  facing  the  earth 
with  stone ;  but  the  work  is  too  feebly  constructed,  and  too  limited  in  extent,  to  be  of 
any  material  service.  Nothing  less  than  a  strong  compact  fortification,  raised  along  the 
whole  line  of  the  bank,  could  effectually  protect  it ;  for  though  a  part  may  be  preserved 
for  a  time  by  a  facing  of  stone,  yet  it  must  fall  at  last,  as  the  sea  continues  to  sap  the  de- 
fenceless bank  at  each  extremity  of  it,  and  so  works  its  way  round  it.  This  mode  of  de- 
struction has  been  very  unequivocally  practised  upon  a  partial  embankment  opposite  to 
one  of  the  great  boarding-houses ;  but  the  proprietors  declare  that  they  cannot  afford  to 
undertake  the  immense  work  that  would  save  their  houses,  and  the  visitors  do  not  favour  a 
subscription,  concluding  that  when  they  are  swallowed  up  somebody  or  other  will  be  found 
to  raise  others  in  their  place — and  so  Blackpool  is  left  to  its  fate.  I  observed  in  many 
places,  on  the  face  of  the  bank,  regular  horizontal  beds  of  sand,  shells,  and  rounded  pebbles, 
some  of  them  two  feet  in  thickness.  It  is  evident,  from  the  appearance  of  these  beds,  that 
the  sea  has  been  instrumental  in  forming  the  bank,  though  it  is  now  advancing  again  to 

recover 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    imiTAIJT.  105 

recover  its  ancient  inheritance.  Its  work  of  destruction  is  much  facilitated  by  the  strata 
which  it  has  contributed  to  the  land,  for  they  crumble  down  on  a  very  light  shock,  leav- 
ing overhanging  masses  of  marl  to  fall  from  their  own  weight. 

I  continued  my  tour  from  Blackpool  along  the  sands,  which  are  beautifully  clean  and 
even,  and  so  hard,  that  the  wheels  of  a  carriage  scarcely  leave  any  impression  upon  them. 
Before  I  commenced  my  journey  from  Liverpool,  I  had  received  very  discouraging  repre- 
sentations of  the  danger  I  should  meet  with  from  quicksands  between  that  port  and  the 
Sohvay  Frith  ;  but  I  walked  nearly  the  whole  of  this  distance  along  the  shore  without  once 
sinking  up  to  my  ancles.  There  may  be  quicksands  which  I  did  not  encounter,  but  a 
pedestrian  has  nothing  to  fear  from  them,  for  they  require  some  agitation  before  they  are 
fit  to  bury  a  man ;  and,  on  the  first  notice  of  a  soft  place,  he  may  easily  withdraw  his 
foot.  On  horse-back  the  experiment  of  course  would  be  more  perilous,  as  the  Aveight  of 
the  animal,  with  his  rider,  would  plunge  him  deeper  into  the  sand  on  the  first  step,  and 
his  unruly  struggles  speedily  set  it  all  in  motion,  and  render  his  extrication  impracticable. 
Such,  it  appears,  would  be  the  consequence,  when  one  comes  to  write  the  matter  down, 
but  I  have  not  heard  that  any  such  accident  ever  happened. 

1  remarked,  lying  on  the  sands  near  Blackpool,  great  quantities  of  pudding-stone,  in 
masses  frequently  of  many  tons  weight.  The  cement  appeared  to  be  an  argillaceous  stone, 
and  included  a  great  variety  of  pebbles.  The  whole  substance  was  exceedingly  hard,  and 
on  the  surface,  where  it  was  planed  and  polished  by  the  action  of  the  sea,  had  all  the 
beauty  of  variegated  marble.  It  is  formed,  I  presume,  from  the  marl  bank,  the  marl  con- 
tributing the  cement,  and  the  beds  of  beach  intersecting  it,  the  pebbles.  1  observed  no- 
thing like  rock  in  the  bank,  the  pudding-stone,  therefore,  must  be  disengaged  from  it 
before  it  is  consolidated ;  and  indeed  I  saw  numerous  pieces  of  it  lying  among  the  beach 
on  the  shore,  in  the  first  stage  of  its  formation,  the  clay  being  just  malleable. 

From  Blackpool  you  have  a  view  of  Blackcombe,  the  southernmost  mountain  of 
Cumberland,  which  from  this  distance  appears  to  jut  into  the  sea.  The  sight  of  it  set  me 
off  in  spirits  on  my  journey ;  for  I  had  now  a  promise  of  some  relief  from  the  sickening 
lameness  and  dulness  of  the  country  with  which  I  had  lately  been  familiar.  After  walk- 
ing a  mile  or  two,  the  Coniston  Fells,  a  very  remarkable  and  picturesque  group,  opened 
upon  my  view,  and  speedily  a  great  range  of  the  Westmoreland  and  Cumberland  moun- 
tains were  added  to  my  prospect.  I  continued  my  walk  to  Rossall  Point,  the  southern  horn 
of  Morecambe  Bay,  and  bounding  Wyre-water,  an  estuary,  several  hundred  yards  across, 
at  low  water,  and  deep  enough  to  afford  a  harbour  to  vessels  of  large  burthen.  The  ap- 
proaches to  the  channel  are  intricate  ;  and  on  each  side  of  it  is  a  bank  of  sand,  of  amazing 
depth.  From  hence,  having  walked  as  far  in  this  direction  as  it  was  possible  for  a  man  to 
walk,  I  retraced  my  steps  for  a  mile  or  two,  to  Rossall  Hall,  an  old  mansion,  the  seat  of 
B.  F.  Hesketh,  Esq.  wanting  sadly  a  few  trees  about  it,  but  not  more  naked  than  every 
other  house  within  a  circle  of  many  miles.  I  was  very  hospitably  entertained  by 
VOL.  ii.  P  Mr. 


106  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Mr.  Hesketh,  and  received  from  him  much  useful  information  relative  to  my  future  route. 
This  gentleman's  estate  has  suffered  greatly  from  the  depredations  of  the  sea ;  but  he  was 
now  far  advanced  in  a  grand  plan  of  defence,  which,  considered  as  the  work  of  an  individual, 
is  certainly  a  vast  undertaking.  He  was  fully  aware  of  the  inefficacy  of  all  partial  expe- 
dients, and  therefore  determined  to  raise  an  embankment  along  the  whole  line  of  his 
estate,  that  lies  exposed  to  the  sea,  an  extent  of  two  miles  and  a  half.  The  embankment 
forms  an  inclined  plane  about  ten  yards  in  depth :  the  foundation  is  composed  of  a  bed  of 
beach  ;  over  this  is  spread  a  thick  layer  of  marl ;  into  which  are  imbedded  regular  ranges 
of  limestone  flags,  laid  edgeways,  and  forming  a  firm,  compact  pavement.  The  limestone 
is  brought  from  a  considerable  distance,  greatly  increasing  the  expenses;  but  it  is  indis- 
pensably necessary,  as  its  parts,  from  the  angularity  of  the  fractures,  are  found  to  jam  more 
firmly  together  than  is  the  case  with  any  other  kind  of  stone.  The  expense  of  such  an 
undertaking  will  undoubtedly  be  immense;  but  not  greater,  perhaps,  than  is  justified  by 
the  richness  of  the  land  which  it  is  designed  to  protect.  The  whole  of  the  flat  tract  lying 
between  the  Kibble  and  \\yre-water  is  exceedingly  productive,  and  the  soil  so  rich,  that 
many  parts  of  it  have  been  in  tillage  for  sixty  years  without  interruption.  Such  land  is 
certainly  worth  saving,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  this  embankment  at  llossall  may  urge  other 
proprietors  who  have  been  equally  sufferers  to  an  equal  exertion  of  determined  resistance. 

Mr.  Hesketh  was  kind  enough  to  send  a  servant  with  me  from  his  house,  to  conduct 
me  by  the  nearest  road  to  Lancaster,  across  the  Cocker  Sands ;  a  course  not  to  be  pur- 
sued with  safety  by  a  stranger.  News  of  a  vessel  with  a  boat,  lying  in  Wyre-vvater,  sug- 
gested this  plan,  and  alone  rendered  it  practicable ;  for  there  is  no  regular  ferry  over  the 
river,  nearer  than  three  or  four  miles  from  its  mouth.  Having  crossed  the  stream,  I  pulled 
off  my  shoes  and  stockings,  at  the  recommendation  of  my  companion,  and  commenced  a 
disagreeable  walk,  over  a  dreary  waste  of  wet  sand.  When  advanced  two  or  three  miles, 
nothing  conld  be  more  dismal  than  the  view  around  me.  I  stood  nearly  in  the  centre  of 
a  circle  of  sand,  at  least  twenty  miles  in  circumference,  and  bounded  on  every  side  by  so 
flat  a  coast,  that  I  could  see  no  signs  of  dry  land,  except  here  and  there  a  house,  which 
rose  upon  the  dull  expanse ;  but,  in  such  a  situation,  excited  no  images  of  cheerfulness 
and  comfort.  A  gloomy  sky,  and  a  light  mist,  gave  a  finishing  effect  to  the  picture,  which 
struck  me  as  no  bad  representation  of  the  land  on  the  first  subsidence  of  the  deluge.  Some 
querulous  critic  may  ask  how  the  houses  could  be  accounted  for  in  such  a  representation, 
but  I  shall  not  stop  to  explain  them  away. 

I  found  my  feet  miserably  benumbed  with  paddling  in  and  out  of  water,  and  the 
soles  of  them  not  a  little  offended  by  the  sharp  ridges  into  which  the  sands  were  washed 
up  by  the  sea ;  but  my  attention  was  soon  diverted  from  these  matters,  by  an  intimation 
from  my  guide,  that,  according  to  his  computation,  it  was  necessary  to  push  on  with  all 
speed,  or  we  should  find  the  tide  too  high  in  the  Cocker  to  allow  us  to  ford  it.  Had  this 
proved  the  case,  our  only  alternative  would  have  been  to  swim  across ;  for  before  we  could 

have 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  107 

have  reached  the  land  by  any  other  way,  the  sea  would  have  flowed  over  the  whole  expanse 
of  the  sands.  This  comes,  said  my  companion,  while  his  mind  was  still  in  doubt,  of  not 
thinking  of  the  tides ;  and  his  remark,  my  conscience  told  me,  was  pointed  at  me,  who 
had  certainly,  contrary  to  an  express  warning,  slept  a  full  hour  after  day-light,  without 
dreaming  of  the  Cocker.  We  were  in  time,  nevertheless,  to  ford  the  river  without  wetting 
our  knees ;  and  after  a  walk  of  six  miles,  landed  in  safety  at  Cockersand  Abbey. 

A  hermitage  was  founded  on  this  spot,  by  William  of  Lancaster;  which  was  after- 
wards made  an  hospital,  for  a  prior  and  several  infirm  brethren ;  dedicated  to  St.  Mary, 
and  subordinate  to  the  abbey  of  Leicester.  About  the  year  1190,  it  underwent  another 
revolution,  being  changed  into  an  abbey  for  Premonstratensian  Canons.  It  is  mentioned, 
as  a  peculiar  circumstance  in  the  history  of  this  religious  house,  that  within  three  years 
after  its  dissolution  by  Henry  VIII.  it  was  again  restored  to  its  ancient  privileges,  by  that 
monk- routing  monarch. 

The  buildings  are  said  to  have  covered  an  acre  of  ground ;  but  nothing  now  remains 
of  them  except  a  small  chapter-house,  and  some  fragments  of  walls  at  the  edge  of  the  sands. 
The  chapter-house  has  suffered  much  from  time  and  neglect,  but  is  still  sufficiently  pre- 
served to  shew  that  it  was  a  very  costly  and  beautiful  structure.  The  form  is  an  octagon, 
each  side  of  which  is  ornamented  with  a  pointed  arch,  resting  on  small  circular  columns, 
the  capitals  of  which  were  composed  of  human  heads.  The  roof  is  vaulted,  and  supported 
by  a  single  massive  column,  with  a  highly-worked  capital,  rising  from  the  centre  of  the 
floor.  From  this  column,  and  from  smaller  ones  in  the  walls,  spring  numerous  arches, 
which  spread  themselves  over  the  vaulting.  The  room  is  not  more  than  ten  yards  in 
diameter ;  and  this  small  space  crowded  with  such  a  profusion  of  ornamental  architecture, 
has  an  effect  of  extraordinary  richness.  The  chapter-house  belonging  to  Margan  Abbey, 
in  Glamorganshire,  was  of  a  similar  design,  the  arches  on  the  vaulting  springing  from  a 
central  column;  but  it  is  now  in  complete  ruins;  and  this  at  Cockersand  is,  I  believe,  the 
only  specimen  of  the  kind  to  be  seen  in  the  kingdom.  It  is  well  worthy  of  preservation 
for  its  elegance  and  beauty,  as  well  as  for  its  singularity ;  but  it  is  suffered  to  stand  in  a 
very  neglected  state.  It  is  the  property  of  J.  Dalton,  Esq.  and  is  used  as  the  burial-place 
of  the  family;  though  seemingly  not  the  more  regarded  on  that  account.  The  floor  is  un- 
paved,  and  covered  with  rubbish ;  the  windows  blocked  up,  and  the  entrance  filled  by  an 
old  wooden  door. 

At  a  short  distance  from  hence  is  Glasson-dock,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Lune ; 
where  a  comfortable  inn  received  me,  after  my  arduous  experiment  of  walking  and 
wading,  well  prepared  for  rest  and  refreshment.  This  dock  was  built  for  the  reception  of 
West-Indiamen,  and  other  large  vessels  belonging  to  the  port  of  Lancaster.  They  discharge 
their  cargoes  here,  which  are  transported  in  lighters  to  the  town.  The  river  is  navigable  as 
far  as  the  bridge ;  but  the  channel  is  so  crooked  and  obstructed  by  shallows,  that  vessels 
of  more  than  two  hundred  tons  burthen  never  advance  higher  up  than  this  place. 

p  2  Leaving 


108  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Leaving  the  dock,  I  had  soon  a  fine  view  of  a  long  reach  of  the  Lune,  bounded  by  the 
tOAvn  of  Lancaster;  the  river  expanded  into  a  noble  breadth  by  the  rise  of  the  tide,  and 
the  banks  on  each  side  varied  by  woods,  corn-fields,  and  meadows.  On  the  right  bank, 
which  rises  from  the  water  with  a  bold  swell,  darkened  with  wood,  is  a  seat  of  the  Duke  of 
Hamilton's,  whose  grounds  extend  for  a  considerable  distance  along  the  river,  and  are  laid 
out  with  great  taste.  On  my  arrival  at  Lancaster,  I  found  that  the  assizes  were  about  to 
be  holden,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  me  to  look  about  me  with  as  much  dispatch 
as  possible ;  as  the  coming  of  the  judges  would  make  a  bed  an  accommodation  not  to  be 
thought  of  by  any  one,  who  had  not  laid  his  plans  a  month  beforehand.  The  hurry  and 
confusion  had  already  begun,  in  preparation  for  the  business  of  the  sessions,  and  the  general 
festival  out  of  prison,  which,  according  to  custom,  takes  place  on  the  trial  of  the  wretches 
within.  It  is  not  worth  while  to  draw  any  heavy  moral  deductions  from  such  a  custom, 
but  it  is  rather  too  much  to  see  the  ladies  putting  on  their  bonnets  in  the  morning,  to  look 
at  the  judges,  and  hear  the  prisoners  condemned  to  death ;  and  then  take  them  off 
again,  to  prepare  for  the  dance  at  night.  One  would  not  expect  that  they  should  return 
home  to  eat  no  dinner,  but,  without  incurring  the  charge  of  any  mawkish  sentimentality, 
one  may  be  permitted  to  feel  something  revolting  in  the  very  name  of  an  assize-ball. 

Lancaster,  though  the  capital  of  the  county,  is  inferior  to  several  other  towns  in  it, 
both  in  size  and  population.  The  inhabitants  do  not  exceed  nine  thousand  five  hundred. 
The  town  is  irregularly  built ;  and  in  the  older  parts  of  it,  very  close,  confined,  and  ill 
arranged  ;  but  there  are  several  more  modern  streets,  laid  out  with  more  judgment  and 
taste,  in  which  the  houses  being  all  built  of  a  fine  grey  freestone,  have  a  costly  and  hand- 
some appearance.  This  stone  is  procured  from  a  quarry  within  half  a  mile  of  the  town, 
and  is  of  a  very  beautiful  texture.  It  is  soft  when  first  quarried,  and  therefore  easily 
worked  ;  but  becomes  hard  enough  on  long  exposure  to  the  air  for  the  purposes  of 
building. 

There  is  a  handsome  entrance  into  Lancaster  from  the  north,  over  a  singularly  elegant 
bridge  of  five  arches,  crossing  the  Lune.  The  bridge  is  five  hundred  and  forty-nine  feet  in 
length;  and  was  built  after  a  design  by  Mr.  Harrison,  at  an  expense  of  ,£14,000.  The 
pressure  on  the  foundation  is  relieved  by  a  perforation  in  the  form  of  an  arch  over  each 
pier,  above  which  is  a  pediment,  supported  by  two  Doric  pillars.  The  town  is  airy  and 
healthy,  being  built  on  the  side  of  a  hill  above  the  river.  The  summit  is  crowned  with  the 
castle,  which  from  several  points  of  view  at  a  little  distance  is  a  very  fine  object;  com- 
posing a  vast  mass  of  grey  building,  grand  from  its  extent,  and  its  elevated  situation,  and 
solemn  and  dignified  from  its  aspect  of  antiquity.  It  is  not  interfered  with  by  the  roofs 
and  chimneys  of  the  town ;  and  from  the  south,  the  view  of  it  is  improved  by  a  noble  back 
ground,  filled  up  by  the  lake  mountains. 

Lancaster  was  selected  as  a  station  by  the  Romans,  for,  commanding  an  extensive  pro- 
spect along  the  coast  to  the  northward,  it  was  well  calculated  for  a  post  of  observation,  to 

guard 


VOYAGE  UOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  109 

guard  against  any  sudden  incursions  by  the  Caledonians.  Many  ancient  remains  have,  at 
various  times,  been  dug  up  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  but  they  have  already  been  described,  and 
will  require  no  particular  notice  from  me.  Like  all  the  fragments  of  art  left  by  the  Romans  in 
this  country,  they  are  somewhat  rude ;  and  do  not  discover  any  of  that  nice  skill  and  refined 
taste  which  we  habitually  look  for  in  the  works  of  that  distinguished  people.  We  are 
naturally  interested  in  every  trace  of  their  dominion  here,  and  in  every  vestige  of  their  in- 
genuity; and  a  British  antiquary  may  be  flattered,  by  breaking  up  little  patches  of  clas- 
sical ground,  on  his  own  soil ;  but  Britain  appears  to  have  been  of  too  little  moment  in  the 
estimation  of  its  powerful  conquerors, — too  remote, — and  too  barbarous, — to  have  excited 
much  of  their  curiosity  and  attention.  During  the  long  period  that  it  was  peaceably  occu- 
pied by  them,  it  is  probable,  that  a  situation  in  it  was  considered  as  little  better  than  a  state 
of  exile.  Soldiers,  and  adventurers  in  their  train,  may  have  found  some  account  in  the 
plunder  of  the  people ;  but  Rome  does  not  appear  to  have  sent  hither  any  of  her  more 
illustrious  artists,  to  leave  amongst  us  monuments  of  her  highest  skill,  and  most  polished 
taste. 

The  castle  has  been  built  at  various  times,  and  its  parts  are  very  irregular  in  their 
size,  forms,  and  styles  of  architecture  ;  composing  altogether,  when  seen  near,  a  broken  and 
unsightly  mass,  setting  all  unity  and  consistency  of  design  at  defiance.  The  walls,  con- 
necting five  ancient  towers  and  several  modern  buildings,  inclose  an  area  of  three  hundred 
and  eighty  feet,  by  three  hundred  and  fifty.  One  of  the  towers,  still  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  Hadrian's  Tower,  is  supposed  to  be  a  Roman  work  ;  but  it  has  of  late  years  been 
newly  faced  with  freestone,  and,  together  with  some  other  parts  of  the  castle,  incumbered 
with  a  load  of  Gothic  ornaments,  not  in  the  purest  taste,  and  entirely  disagreeing  with  the 
plainness  and  simple  majesty  of  the  towers,  that  have  been  suffered  to  remain  untouched. 
The  Dungeon  and  Well-Towers  have  been  also  concluded  to  be  Roman,  by  certain  enthu- 
siasts in  the  discovery  of  classical  remains;  but  more  sober  judges  refer  them  to  no  later  date 
than  the  Saxon  era.  The  parties  have  no  proof  to  bring  in  support  of  their  respective 
opinions,  except  the  evidence  of  the  workmanship ;  and  this  is  rather  an  uncertain  crite- 
rion, as  the  Saxons  derived  their  manner  and  forms  of  architecture  from  the  Romans  their 
masters. 

The  Gateway  Tower,  which  is  transcendency  the  most  beautiful  one,  is  ascribed, 
without  an  opposing  voice,  to  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  On  a  shield  on  one  side  of  it  the 
arms  of  England  are  quartered  with  those  of  France,  Edward  being  the  first  king  of  this 
country  who  presumed  upon  this  great  distinction  of  heraldry.  The  building  is  of  Gothic 
architecture,  and  consists  of  two  large  octagonal  towers,  connected  by  a  curtain  and  the 
gates.  The  entrance  is  defended  by  a  portcullis,  and  by  projecting  battlements,  supported  by 
a  triple  range  of  corbels.  Over  the  gate  is  a  niche,  which  once,  it  is  presumed,  contained 
the  statue  of  the  founder.  Opposite  to  this  tower  stands  the  Keep,  a  vast  work,  which 
derives  an  air  of  uncommon  grandeur  from  the  breadth  of  its  parts,  and  its  extreme  sim- 
plicity. 


110  VOVAOE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

plicity.  The  walls  are  of  immense  thickness,  and  seventy-eight  feet  in  height.  From  the 
style  of  the  original  windows,  which  are  small  and  round-headed,  this  building,  it  is  ima- 
gined, is  Saxon ;  but  the  upper  part  of  it  has  been  rebuilt  since  its  first  foundation.  On  a 
stone  in  the  battlements  is  the  following  inscription — 

E.  R. 


1585  R.  A. 

by  which  it  appears  that  the  tower  was  repaired  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  at  the  time 
when  all  the  castles  and  forts  in  the  kingdom  were  put  into  a  state  of  defence  against  the 
threatened  invasion  by  the  Spanish  Armada.  R.  A.  signifies  Richard  Ashton,  who  being 
luckily  sheriff  at  the  time  of  the  repairs,  had  an  opportunity  of  having  R.  A.  coupled  with 
the  royal  initials.  On  the  summit  of  the  tower  is  a  small  turret,  called  John-o'-Gaunt's 
chair ;  and  the  seat  commands  a  very  magnificent  prospect,  including  the  windings  of  the 
Lune,  and  beyond  its  western  bank,  the  great  bay  of  Morecambe,  deeply  cut  into  the 
land,  and  girded  round  by  nearly  all  the  mountains  of  the  lakes. 

The  whole  castle  is  now  appropriated  to  the  purposes  of  the  gaol ;  and  many  addi- 
tions have  been  made,  at  an  expense  of  ,£40,000,  to  render  it  complete  in  all  its  parts. 
It  situation  is  extremely  airy  ;  and  from  its  extent,  the  admirable  arrangement  of  its  va- 
rious divisions,  and  their  ample  convenience  and  security,  it  may  be  looked  upon  as  the 
finest  gaol  in  the  kingdom.  I  have  never  visited  a  prison  where  there  was  so  little  to 
shock  the  eye,  so  little  to  observe  of  harshness  and  severity,  where  there  was  so  much 
liberty,  yet  so  much  quietness,  and  so  general  an  appearance,  even  amongst  the  most 
abandoned  of  the  prisoners,  of  order,  comfort,  and  cleanliness.  Great  attention  is  paid  to 
the  proper  classification  of  the  prisoners,  so  that  the  debtors,  and  those  confined  for  trifling 
offences,  are  not  compelled  to  associate  with  the  more  vicious  inmates  of  the  prison.  The 
great  court-yard  of  the  castle,  containing  an  area  of  two  thousand  eight  hundred  yards,  is 
reserved  as  a  place  of  exercise  for  the  debtors  only ;  and  their  lodgings  are  as  neat  and 
comfortable  as  possible. 

The  male  felons  are  lodged  in  two  handsome  towers,  four  stories  high,  each  story  con- 
taining eight  cells.  Between  the  wards  and  the  great  boundary-wall  are  some  strong 
solitary  cells  for  refractory  prisoners,  and  within  the  same  space  are  a  warm  and  a  cold 
bath.  Four  open  courts  are  allotted  for  the  felons  to  walk  in,  where,  if  they  behave  with 
decency,  they  are  permitted  to  remain  unincumbered  by  fetters,  which  are  never  used  in 
this  prison,  except  for  turbulent  conduct  during  confinement.  All  possibility  of  escape  is 
guarded  against  by  the  plan  of  building  adopted  in  these  parts  of  the  prison,  which  are 
singularly  constructed,  without  wood  or  plaister,  the  walls,  inside  and  out,  and  the  floors 
and  roofs,  being  all  finished  with  hewn  stone. 

Great  pains  are  taken  to  encourage  a  disposition  to  industry  among  the  prisoners,  as 
the  best  means  of  diverting  them  from  vicious  conversation  and  stratagems  of  mischief. 

Several 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  Ill 

Several  large  apartments  are  reserved  as  work-shops,  where  those  who  are  inclined  to 
work  may  employ  themselves  in  weaving,  shoe-making,  and  various  other  occupations. 
This  system  cannot  be  too  much  commended,  being,  of  all  others,  the  best  calculated  to 
make  a  prison  a  house  of  reform.  Many  who  have  entered  here,  ignorant  of  any  kind  of 
trade,  have  been  taught  to  weave ;  and,  on  their  liberation,  instead  of  being  more  deeply 
confirmed  in  idleness  and  vice,  as  would  have  been  the  case  in  most  prisons,  have  returned 
to  the  world  able  and  anxious  to  gain  a  subsistence  by  honest  industry.  The  prisoners 
receive  as  wages  one-third  of  the  produce  of  their  labour,  part  of  which  is  paid  to  them 
weekly  during  their  confinement,  and  the  residue  on  their  discharge.  The  two  remaining 
thirds  are  paid  to  the  county-treasurer.  The  county  allowance  to  the  crown-prisoners  per 
week  is  six  pounds  of  wheaten  bread,  two  pounds  and  a  half  of  oatmeal,  and  ten  pounds 
of  potatoes,  with  the  addition  on  Sunday  of  half  a  pound  of  beef,  and  one  quart  of  soup. 

The  county-courts,  and  the  offices  connected  with  them,  are  included  among  the 
castle-buildings,  and  are  all  well  fitted  for  their  respective  uses,  and  finished  with  great 
elegance  and  taste.  The  county-hall  is  a  spacious  apartment,  capable  of  holding  conve- 
niently fifteen  hundred  people.  It  is  a  semi-polygon,  if  the  term  be  intelligible,  being  the 
half  of  a  space  formed  by  fourteen  equal  sides.  The  cieling  is  of  stone,  vaulted  and  orna- 
mented with  arches  intersecting  each  other,  and  springing  from  light-clustered  columns, 
with  plain  capitals.  The  crown-court  is  an  oblong,  not  so  sumptuous  in  its  architecture, 
but  spacious,  and  well  contrived  for  the  purposes  of  seeing  and  hearing.  There  is  a  con- 
siderable area  behind  the  bar,  in  which  is  a  long  flight  of  steps,  on  which  the  people  stand, 
having  a  full  view  of  the  bench  and  the  bar,  without  incommoding  the  officers  of  the  court. 

A  little  detached  from  the  castle  is  the  parish  church,  a  handsome  Gothic  building  of 
stone,  with  a  lofty  square  tower.  The  interior  is  finely  proportioned  ;  but  I  must  protest 
against  the  taste  of  the  person,  whosoever  he  may  be,  whom  it  has  pleased  to  see  it 
dressed  in  a  general  coat  of  white- wash.  The  nave  is  separated  from  the  aisles  by  seven 
pointed  arches  on  each  side,  springing  from  clustered  columns,  with  simple  capitals.  A 
more  elevated  arch  leads  into  the  choir,  resting  on  columns  which  have  escaped  the  white- 
washer,  and  been  painted  to  imitate  variegated  marble,  but  by  so  untaught  and  reckless 
a  hand,  that  they  look  not  like  stone,  but  wood  in  disguise.  The  arch  assumes  the  com- 
mon fashion  of  white-wash,  and  forms,  with  its  supporters,  a  most  ridiculous  botch,  that 
might  have  done  credit  to  a  painter  on  gingerbread.  It  is  really  a  pity  to  see  a  handsome 
building  like  this  wantonly  yielded  up,  by  an  edict  from  the  vestry,  to  be  daubed  and 
disfigured  in  this  irreverend  manner.  The  fine  freestone,  of  which  the  church  is  built,  with 
its  natural  stains  from  time  and  weather,  would  certainly  have  a  better  effect  than  this 
mean,  chilling  covering  of  white-wash,  or  than  the  clumsy  smearing  intended  to  pass  for 
marble. 

Among  the  monuments  I  observed  one  with  an  inscription,  that  has  been  held  up 
by  Pennant  to  the  contempt  of  his  readers,  as  a  model  of  fulsome  and  disgusting  pane- 
gyric. 


112  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

gyric.  It  is  erected  to  the  memory  of  Thomas  Covell,  who,  as  the  inscription  reports, 
lived  to  be  six  times  mayor  of  the  town  ;  forty-eight  years  keeper  of  the  castle ;  forty-six 
years  one  of  the  coroners  of  the  county  palatine  of  Lancaster ;  captain  of  the  freehold 
band  of  the  hundred  of  Lonsdale,  on  this  side  the  sand ;  and  justice  of  peace  and  quorum 
throughout  the  said  county  of  Lancaster.  All  this  is  to  be  borne ;  but  there  follows  some 
miserable  poetry,  in  which  the  good  citizen's  plain,  serviceable,  alderman-like  qualities 
are  swelled  out  into  all  that  is  great,  and  wise,  and  magnanimous,  filling  every  corner  of 
the  earth  with  his  fame.  Such  a  piece  of  vanity,  springing  from  the  ill-judging  tenderness 
of  relatives,  may  be  forgiven,  however,  in  this  instance,  as  the  inscription  is  dated  1609; 
but  in  how  few  churches  may  we  not  point  out  examples,  even  of  the  date  of  this  refined 
age,  that  are  equally  ridiculous.  It  may  be  objected  generally  against  high-flown  epitaphs, 
that  strangers  will  not  believe  them,  or  not  care  for  them,  and  that  friends  cannot  be  in- 
formed by  them. 

Of  the  other  public  buildings  of  the  place,  the  town-hall  is  the  only  one  that  is  parti- 
cularly worthy  of  notice.  It  is  a  neat  structure,  entered  by  a  portico,  supported  by  Tus- 
can columns,  and  crowned  with  an  elegant  cupola. 

Lancaster  returns  two  members  to  parliament.  It  was  made  a  borough  in  the  fourth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Richard  the  First,  but  did  not  send  members  till  the  twenty-third  of 
Edward  the  First.  The  members  are  chosen  by  the  burgesses,  whether  resident  or  not: 
the  mayor,  and  two  bailiffs,  are  the  returning  officers.  The  freemen  of  the  place  are 
exempt  from  the  payment  of  the  tolls  and  town-duties  on  the  exportation  of  goods,  to 
which  others  are  liable. 

The  trade  of  Lancaster,  a  few  years  since,  was  very  considerable.     In  1801  there 
were  forty-seven  vesssels  employed  in  the  foreign  trade  of  this  port,  principally  for  the 
supply  of  the  West  India  markets,  carrying  more  than  eleven  thousand  and  eighty  tons. 
The  whole  number  of  vessels  belonging  to  the  port,  including  coasters,  amounted  to 
seventy-six,  carrying  thirteen  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninety-six  tons,  and  navigated 
by  sixteen  hundred  and  five  men.     This  amount  is  at  present  very  materially  reduced. 
The  exports  to  the  West  Indies  are  large  quantities  of  cabinet  work,  for  which  the  town 
is  famous,  the  Manchester  and  Glasgow  manufactures,  hardware  and  cutlery  from  Bir- 
mingham and  Sheffield,  with  provisions,  sadlery,  woollen  and  linen  cloths,  &c.  &c.     The 
town  is  not  noted  for  any  particular  manufactures:  that  of  sail-cloth  has  been,  for  many 
years,  the  most  considerable ;  and  lately  several  large  cotton  manufactories  have  been 
established.     Here  are  rope  and  twine  walks;  one  house  for  the  refining  of  sugar;  two 
public  breweries;  several  tobacco  and  snuff  manufactories;  a  pipe  manufactory;  several 
hat  manufactories,  stocking  manufactories,  &c.     After  naming  these  familiar  establish- 
ments, I  would  not  willingly  omit  a  Repository,  instituted  by  the  ladies  of  the  place,  for 
the  sale  of  various  works  of  use  and  ornament.     The  profits  arising  from  the  sale  are 
applied  to  the  relief  of  the  poor.     At  the  time  of  the  assizes  a  splendid  display  is  got  up 

of 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  113 

of  the  goods  of  the  Repository,  which  certainly  does  great  credit  to  the  art,  and  industry, 
and  benevolence  of  those  who  support  it. 

By  a  canal  lately  completed,  Lancaster  has  the  advantage  of  an  inland  navigation, 
which,  including  its  windings,  extepds  above  five  hundred  miles,  passing  through  the 
counties  of  Lincoln,  Nottingham,  York,  Westmoreland,  Chester,  Stafford,  Warwick, 
Leicester,  Oxford,  Worcester,  &c.  All  the  country  from  Kendal,  in  the  course  of  this 
canal,  for  sixteen  miles,  abounds  with  limestone;  and  from  Chorley  to  West-Haughton 
there  are  large  mines  of  coals.  The  whole  country  north  of  Chorley,  through  which  the 
canal  passes,  is  very  much  in  want  of  coals,  and  the  country  south  of  Lancaster  is  equally 
in  want  of  lime ;  hence,  by  opening  a  communication  between  the  port  of  Lancaster  and 
this  tract  of  inland  country,  an  amazing  benefit  has  accrued  to  the  lands,  manufactures, 
and  commerce,  of  this  part  of  the  kingdom. 

About  a  mile  above  the  town,  the  Lancaster  canal  is  carried  over  the  Lune  by  an 
aqueduct-bridge,  which  was  designed  by  Mr.  Rennie,  and  does  the  greatest  credit  to  his 
skill  and  taste.  It  is  the  most  magnificent  structure  of  the  kind  that  I  have  ever  seen, 
combining  amazing  strength  with  great  beauty  and  elegance,  in  all  its  parts  and  propor- 
tions. The  foundations  of  the  piers  were  laid  with  vast  labour  and  difficulty,  at  the  depth 
of  twenty  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  river.  They  consist  of  a  flooring  of  timber,  sup- 
ported by  piles  thirty  feet  in  length,  and  are  said  to  have  alone  cost  -^15,000.  The  expense 
of  the  whole  work  amounted  to  more  than  -£45,000.  The  length  of  the  bridge  is  six 
hundred  and  sixty-four  feet.  It  consists  of  five  semicircular  arches,  each  of  seventy 
feet  span,  and  rising  thirty-nine  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  water.  The  total  height, 
from  the  foundation  of  the  piers  to  the  top  of  the  battlements,  is  seventy-nine  feet. 
Vessels  of  sixty  tons  burthen  pass  over  the  bridge. 

Finding,  according  to  notice,  that  there  was  neither  board  nor  lodging  for  me  in  the 
town  on  the  arrival  of  the  judges,  I  took  my  departure,  and  proceeded  to  the  coast,  along 
the  western  bank  of  the  Lune,  which  opens  into  Morecambe  Bay.  This  deep  inlet  pene- 
trates nearly  to  the  base  of  the  mountains,  covering  a  great  expanse  of  ground,  which  is 
left  dry  on  the  ebbing  of  the  tide.  It  is  about  twelve  miles  in  breadth,  eighteen  in  depth, 
and  inclosed  by  a  semicircular  sweep  of  coast,  more  than  fifty  miles  in  extent.  Several 
rivers  discharge  themselves  into  it,  but  they  are  all  fordable  when  the  tide  is  out ;  and  the 
sands  are  the  common  road  of  communication  between  the  Lancaster  side  of  the  bay  and 
the  districts  of  Cartmel  and  Furness.  One  might  say  that  the  sands  may  be  crossed  with 
perfect  security,  but  accidents  do  sometimes  happen  upon  them ;  for  now  and  then  per- 
sons are  found  hardy,  or  stupid,  or  obstinate  enough  to  attempt  the  fords,  when  the  rise 
of  the  tide  has  rendered  them  impassable.  Ignorance  cannot  be  pleaded  in  extenuation 
of  an  accident,  for  regular  guides  are  stationed  at  the  fords,  who  remain  in  constant 
attendance  in  all  weathers,  as  long  as  they  can  be  passed  with  security. 

Two  post-boys  were  lost  on  the  day  that  I  arrived  at  Lancaster.  They  had  driven 
VOL.  n.  Q  Lord 


114  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Lord  G.  Cavendish  from  that  place  to  his  seat  at  Holkar  on  the  preceding  evening, 
and  started  to  return  on  the  following  morning,  just  in  time,  had  they  had  their  senses 
about  them,  to  make  their  passage  without  danger.  They  were  very  familiar  with  the 
track,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  tides,  but  had  unluckily  been  carousing 
in  a  public-house,  and  become  so  drunk,  that  they  had  not  the  slightest  thoughts  of  cau- 
tion, or  fear  of  danger.  On  arriving  at  the  first  river,  they  proceeded  to  the  lower  ford, 
though,  had  they  been  sober,  they  must  have  seen  in  a  moment  that  there  was  too  much 
water  to  admit  of  their  crossing.  The  guide,  who  had  taken  his  station  at  the  upper  ford, 
shouted  to  them  to  come  higher  up,  thinking,  in  his  ignorance  of  their  condition,  that  a 
light  warning  would  be  sufficient  to  startle  them  ;  but  they  disregarded  him,  plunged  fear- 
lessly into  the  river,  and  were  seen  no  more.  The  people  at  the  public-house  had  remon- 
strated with  them  before  their  departure,  and  pointed  out  to  them  the  danger  tiie}r  were 
about  to  hurry  into ;  but  they  had  too  completely  lost  their  own  reason,  to  be  moved  by 
the  reasoning  of  others.  Had  those  who  were  sober  been  sober  to  any  purpose,  they 
•would  have  forcibly  locked  the  poor  fellows  up,  and  allowed  them  to  sleep  till  they  had 
recovered  their  senses ;  but  instead  of  this,  they  were  suffered  to  rush  on  to  their  destruc- 
tion, with  the  benefit  only  of  advice  which  they  did  not  understand,  or  conceived  it  a 
merit  to  despise. 

They  had  four  horses  with  them,  two  of  which  speedily  extricated  themselves  from 
the  water,  and  returned  to  Holkar.  One  was  recovered  by  some  people  in  a  boat,  but 
so  exhausted,  that  it  died  in  consequence ;  and  another  was  drowned  far  out  at  sea, 
after  a  miserable  struggle  of  three  hours,  as  was  reported  by  persons  who  watched  it  from 
the  land. 

This  accident  will  gain  a  desperate  name  for  these  sands  for  a  long  time  to  come,  as 
the  gossips  of  the  neighbourhood,  in  their  account  of  it,  will  charge  nothing  to  the  folly 
and  thoughtlessness  of  the  sufferers,  but  all  to  the  natural  dangers  of  the  road.  I  can  con- 
ceive no  circumstance,  from  which  danger  could  result  to  any  one  with  more  than  the 
providence  of  an  infant,  but  the  sudden  rise  of  a  fog  when  he  was  embarked  on  the  sands ; 
and  if  he  thought  he  had  a  right  to  fear  such  a  contingence,  he  might  provide  against  it 
by  carrying  a  compass. 

A  little  to  the  northward  of  the  Lune,  the  coast  presented  something  of  novelty  to  my 
observation,  in  some  rocks  bounding  the  shore,  the  first  that  had  occurred  to  relieve  the 
dull  uniformity  of  the  sands  since  I  quitted  Liverpool.  They  are  on  a  small  scale,  and 
extend  only  for  a  short  distance,  but  may  be  noticed  as  something  worth  looking  at  from 
their  variety.  On  rounding  a  low  point,  in  which  they  terminate  to  the  northward,  Lower 
Heysham  opened  upon  my  view,  a  beautiful  village,  planted  on  one  side  of  a  little  valley, 
of  a  livelier  verdure  than  is  often  to  be  met  with  on  the  coast.  A  prettier  composition  of 
scenery,  of  a  simple  and  placid  character,  I  have  seldom  seen.  The  cottages  are  disposed 
without  any  formality,  at  various  elevations,  on  the  side  of  a  steep  bank,  with  small  gar- 
dens 


View  near  Lower  Heysham,  Lancashire 


Distant  View  of  Whitbarrow  Scar,  Westmorland 


VOTAOB    ROUND    GIIEAT    BRITAIN.  115 

dens  and  orchards  among  them, — and  honeysuckles  creeping  round  the  doors  and  case- 
ments, and  other  simple  decorations,  which,  with  their  perfect  neatness  and  cleanliness, 
make  them  just  such  cottages  as  a  poet  might  be  willing  to  describe  as  the  only  abodes  of 
innocence  and  contentment.  A  calm,  soft  evening,  gave  a  delightful  tone  of  peacefulness 
and  repose  to  the  village,  when  I  first  caught  sight  of  it :  a  few  gleams  of  sunshine  sparkled 
upon  some  of  the  windows  of  the  cottages  ;  but  the  valley  was  mostly  in  shadow,  except 
at  one  extremity,  where  it  opened  into  a  great  expanse  of  sea,  glowing  under  the  warm 
splendor  of  the  setting  sun.  An  ancient  church,  and  a  ruined  chapel,  which  stands  near 
it,  on  a  rock  over  the  sea,  gave  dignity  and  moral  interest  to  the  scene,  and  completed 
one  of  the  prettiest  pictures  that  can  be  imagined. 

A  man  fond  of  poring  over  old  tombstones  (as  who  is  not?)  may  be  pleased  to  muse 
for  an  hour  in  the  church-yard  here.  The  church,  which  is  very  small,  has  suffered  much 
from  modern  alterations,  but  still  retains  a  trace  of  its  antiquity,  in  a  Saxon  arch  forming 
the  entrance.  There  is  nothing  observable  within  it ;  but  many  tombstones,  and  fragments 
of  them,  are  strewed  about  the  church-yard,  which,  from  the  symbols  and  ornaments 
sculptured  upon  them,  are  evidently  of  no  modern  date.  They  have  all  outlived  the  me- 
mory of  those  for  whom  they  were  designed,  and  are  now  subjects  rather  for  meditation 
than  description.  A  sword  and  a  cross  are  the  most  frequent  signs  by  which  they  are 
distinguished ;  but  I  remarked  upon  one  a  sword  and  a  harp,  an  unusual  combination, 
indicating  in  one  individual  the  discordant  characters  of  a  soldier  and  a  minstrel.  An 
altar-tomb,  which  had  the  appearance  of  having  been  very  long  under  ground,  was  lately 
dug  up  here.  It  is  enriched  on  every  side  with  sculpture,  representing  lions'  heads,  and 
groups  of  men  and  various  animals,  which  probably  had,  or  were  intended  to  have,  some 
meaning ;  but  they  are  now  so  blurred  and  mutilated,  and  their  postures  and  actions  ren- 
dered so  equivocal,  that  it  would  be  idle  to  lavish  a  conjecture  upon  them.  A  zigzag 
moulding,  and  some  other  ornaments,  denote  the  tomb  to  be  Saxon ;  but  it  bears  no  sign 
by  which  we  can  discover  or  guess  at  the  personage  to  whose  memory  it  was  erected.  It 
was  in  a  tolerable  state  of  preservation  when  first  taken  from  the  ground,  but  has  become 
injured  by  exposure  to  the  air,  and  disfigured  in  its  ornamental  parts,  by  a  coat  of  vegeta- 
tion. I  heard  the  first  whisper  of  an  intention  to  place  it  under  cover,  and  it  is  a  relic  still 
worthy  of  such  care. 

The  ruined  chapel  that  I  have  mentioned  is  a  small  building,  nine  yards  long,  and 
two  and  a  half  wide,  very  rudely  put  together ;  but  with  sufficient  strength,  though  in  a 
very  exposed  situation,  to  have  resisted  the  storms  of  winter  through  many  centuries.  A 
plain  semicircular  arch  over  the  entrance  denotes  its  Saxon  origin.  It  is  dedicated  to  St. 
Patrick ;  but  by  whom  it  was  founded,  or  on  what  occasion,  is  not  known.  Near  it  there 
are  six  curious  coffins  in  a  row,  hollowed  out  in  the  rock,  with  the  head  and  general  form 
of  the  body  defined .  They  are  all  nearly  of  an  equal  size,  and  were  designed  for  persons 
of  small  stature.  One  of  them  has  a  groove  in  the  inside  for  a  lid,  and  a  small  square  hole 

Q  2  above 


116  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

above  the  head,  in  which  probably  was  fixed  a  cross.  There  is  nothing  recorded  relating 
to  these  remains,  and  tradition  is  quite  silent  on  the  subject.  The  chapel  stands  close  to 
the  sea,  and  may  have  been  erected  here,  and  dedicated  to  St.  Patrick,  to  move  his  inter- 
cession for  the  souls  of  some  unfortunate  persons  who  may  have  perished  by  shipwreck, 
and  whose  bodies  may  have  been  laid  in  the  coffins  in  the  rock.  It  might  not  only,  too, 
have  been  considered  as  a  monument  to  these  sufferers,  but  as  a  general  safeguard  to 
mariners,  who,  before  they  trusted  themselves  to  the  sea,  might  here  give  their  offerings  to 
the  saint,  and  prefer  their  prayers  for  his  protection.  This  venerable  ruin,  and  the  open 
coffins  near  it,  give  so  much  interest  to  this  secluded  valley,  that  I  lingered  and  mused  in 
it  till  the  approach  of  night  warned  me  that  my  day's  journey  was  not  yet  completed. 

Leaving  the  valley,  I  proceeded  for  three  or  four  miles  along  a  flat,  uninteresting 
shore,  and  stopped  at  Poulton,  a  large  village,  where,  according  to  a  pre-arranged  plan,  I 
was  resolved  to  sleep.  I  applied  for  a  bed  at  the  first  public-house  that  I  came  to,  but 
was  peremptorily  informed  that  I  could  neither  have  one,  nor  a  part  of  one,  there  being 
already  a  company  of  sixty  people  in  the  house  to  be  accommodated  for  the  night.  I  had 
no  reason  to  disbelieve  this  account,  for  the  noise  from  within  would  have  done  no  dis- 
credit to  six  hundred  mouths.  Unfortunately  for  me,  this  was  the  first  day  of  a  spring 
tide,  and  the  crowd  collected  in  the  village  were  the  manufacturers  from  the  inland  towns, 
come  for  the  benefit  of  the  physic  in  the  sea.  There  was  another  public-house  in  the 
place,  where  I  learned  that  I  might  have  a  bed ;  a  piece  of  news  which  gave  me  quite  as 
much  surprise  as  satisfaction,  for  there  were  already  men  enough  in  and  about  the  house 
to  people  the  whole  village.  Six  cart-loads  had  arrived  in  the  course  of  the  day;  and  the 
carts  were  now  lying  on  their  shafts  before  the  house,  in  humble  imitation  of  the  coaches, 
and  chaises,  and  gigs,  which  we  see  stopping  the  way  before  more  splendid  establishments 
of  this  description.  In  the  style  and  arrangement  within  doors,  there  was  a  general  re- 
semblance to  the  modes  of  genteeler  boarding-houses,  with  some  variations  that  were  not 
a  little  entertaining  to  me.  On  entering  the  parlour  of  the  visitors,  which  was  the  kitchen 
of  the  family,  I  found  a  long  table  laid  out  for  a  public  supper,  around  which  there  was 
already  collected  a  considerable  party  of  men,  each  taking  his  preparatory  pint  and  pipe. 
With  the  fumes  of  the  tobacco  there  mingled  the  fragrance  of  a  large  pan  of  beef-steaks 
and  onions,  and  another  of  eggs  and  bacon,  which  were  to  compose  the  repast  of  the 
invalids.  The  rooms  above  stairs  were  alive  with  company  ;  but,  on  a  summons  to  sup- 
per, all  flocked  together,  forming  a  party  of  about  forty  people.  There  was  a  large  pro- 
portion of  women  among  them,  many  of  whom  were  so  gaily  attired,  that  I  thought  they 
looked  quite  out  of  place  in  such  an  atmosphere,  though,  to  tell  the  truth,  they  did  not 
seem  to  be  at  all  discontented  with  their  circumstances.  One  or  two  indeed  appeared 
disposed  to  spoil  the  common  conviviality  of  the  meeting,  by  some  affected  ail's  of  deli- 
cacy and  fastidiousness ;  but  they  met  with  no  success,  and  were  speedily  daunted  by  the 
honest  and  heedless  vulgarity  of  the  majority. 

During 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  117 

Daring  supper  no  one  had  evidently  any  thought  but  of  his  plate ;  but  when  all  that 
was  dressed  was  eaten,  and  the  pipes  were  filled,  and  the  ale  had  made  a  circuit  or  two 
round  the  table,  there  burst  forth  a  general  uproar  of  talk  and  laughter,  which  became  still 
more  animated  as  the  ale  continued  its  revolutions ;  till  a  huge  fellow,  fierce  and  foaming, 
rose  up,  and  after  thumping  the  table  with  a  quart  pot,  till  no  other  sound  was  to  be 
heard  in  the  room,  demanded  a  song.  A  song  was  sung,  and  again  every  tongue  broke 
loose ;  till  the  gentleman  with  the  quart  pot  again  interfered,  and  silenced  all  clamour  but 
his  own.  And  still  the  ale  performed  its  rounds,  till  order  was  entirely  confounded,  and 
all  was  talking,  and  singing,  and  laughing,  and  all  together.  The  entertainment  was  novel, 
to  me  at  least ;  and,  upon  the  whole,  I  was  really  inclined  to  think  it  more  amusing  than, 
the  ponderous  decorum  of  higher  company  in  higher  places,  with  the  formal  dulness,  or 
tiresome  officiousness,  of  Mr.  President  and  Mr.  Vice. 

The  amusements  of  the  evening  terminated  with  a  dance ;  but,  at  the  time  this  was 
called  for,  the  ale  had  been  at  least  one  round  too  much ;  and  though  every  man  in  the 
company  could  rise  from  his  chair,  yet  no  one  had  any  control  over  his  motions,  or  could 
stand  still,  or  move  as  he  wished  himself,  or  as  others  directed.  The  ladies  were  merely  a 
little  louder  and  merrier  than  usual,  and  were  still  able  to  jump  about  with  spirit  and  pre- 
cision, had  they  not  been  incessantly  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  blunders  of  their  lawless 
partners,  who,  in  spite  of  every  effort  employed  to  reclaim  them,  and  keep  them  to  the 
figure,  threatened,  at  every  step,  to  plunge  headlong  into  the  fire,  or  out  of  the  window. 
There  was  no  music,  save  the  general  roar  of  the  room,  and  some  irregular  scraping  of 
feet  and  clattering  of  quart  pots,  and  a  drowsy,  crapulous  muttering,  meant  for  a  tune, 
from  some  sick  and  sleepy  guests,  who  still  kept  their  chairs  at  the  table.  Time  and 
exercise  might  eventually  have  given  more  sobriety  and  regularity  to  the  dance :  but, 
unfortunately,  there  was  still  more  ale  in  the  cellar,  and  the  general  complaint  Avas  still  of 
being  thirsty.  This  incorrigible  symptom  leaving  me  nothing  to  hope,  I  did  not  wait  to 
witness  the  final  demise  of  the  company,  but  retired  to  my  bed. 

And  now  my  tribulations  began.  The  landlady,  a  neat,  tidy-looking  woman,  whom 
I  should  not  have  suspected  of  such  atrocities,  conducted  me  up  stairs,  and  opening  a 
door,  held  her  candle  immediately  under  my  nose,  to  guide  me  safely  through  several 
narrow  passages,  with  room  only  for  the  legs  sideways,  made  by  four  beds,  which  formed 
a  blockade  before  the  one  intended  for  myself.  Four  people,  she  informed  me  in  cold 
blood,  were  to  sleep  in  each  of  the  four  beds,  but  I  was  to  have  only  a  single  partner ; 
and  there,  sure  enough,  before  my  eyes,  soundly  sleeping,  and  loudly  snoring,  lay  my 
destined  comrade,  who  had  retired  from  the  riot  below,  an  early  victim  to  ale  and  tobacco. 
My  conductress,  mistaking  my  silence  for  contentment,  had  nearly  escaped  from  the  room 
before  I  could  find  voice  to  arrest  her  steps,  and  unburthen  my  heart.  My  remonstrances, 
it  may  be  imagined,  did  not  want  emphasis ;  but  she  listened  to  them  without  any  kind 
pf  emotion ;  thought  that  my  scruples  were  quite  unconscionable ;  observed  that  we  were 

aH 


118  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

all  Christians,  and  flesh  and  blood  alike ;  and  finally  forced  me  to  compliance,  as  she  sup- 
posed, by  declaring,  that  if  I  did  not  sleep  in  the  bed  that  was  prepared  for  me,  there  was 
no  other  for  me  in  the  house.  There  is  indeed  (she  said)  a  chaff  bed  in  a  hole  at  the  top 
of  the  house;  but  I  should  scarcely  think  of  offering  that  to  a  gentleman.  Now  this  was 
a  straw  held  out  to  a  drowning  man,  and  I  eagerly  seized  hold  of  it.  The  chamber,  I 
found,  was  very  literally  described ;  but  I  had  to  rejoice  that  it  would  not  hold  more  than 
one,  and  crept  into  my  bed  with  the  further  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  I  was  removed,  as 
far  as  possible,  from  the  noise  and  smoke  below. 

On  coming  out  of  my  hole  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  matters  appeared  to  be  in 
much  the  same  state  as  I  had  left  them  on  the  preceding  night,  the  company  having  again 
betaken  themselves  to  pipes  and  ale,  with  appetites  sharpened  by  bathing,  and  copious 
draughts  of  salt-water,     They  were  very  lively  under  their  trials,  and  seemed  to  be  be- 
ginning the  day  with  a  kind  of  ease  and  contentment  in  their  looks  and  manner,  as  if 
there  was  not  the  least  doubt  among  them  that  they  were  going  on  pleasantly  and  pros* 
perously.     For  my  own  part,  I  was  almost  exhausted,  merely  as  a  spectator  of  their 
revels,  and  made  my  escape  from  them  into  the  open  air  with  singular  satisfaction.     It 
would  have  been  by  no  means  safe  to  have  manifested  any  aristocratic  airs  in  their 
presence ;  for  whatever  opinion  another  might  entertain  of  them  and  their  habits,  they 
were  clearly  quite  satisfied  with  themselves,  and  not  at  all  disposed  to  regard  any  one  as 
more  than  an  equal.     These  men  were  removed  a  little  out  of  their  ordinary  track,  and 
elevated  above  themselves  by  holiday  feelings  and  as  much  ale  as  they  could  drink :  but 
I  have  observed,  that  in  the  manners  and  deportment  of  the  people  of  the  lower  orders  in 
Lancashire,  there  is  at  all  times  something  peculiar  and  very  far  from  prepossessing.     A 
stranger  would  unquestionably  pronounce  them  to  be  rude,  coarse,  and  insolent ;  though 
I  have  heard  it  said  in  their  defence,  that  this  external  roughness  is  only  a  kind  of  way  that 
they  have,  and  that  on  a  more  familiar  acquaintance  with  them,  if  it  be  not  found  to  wear 
away,  it  cannot  be  traced  to  any  ill  disposition.  They  have  certainly  less  of  that  common 
politeness,  that  natural  courtesy,  which  forms  one  of  the  distinctions  between  men  and 
bears,  than  any  people  that  ever  fell  under  my  observation.     Their  manners  to  strangers, 
whether  their  equals  or  their  betters,  are  of  the  same  rude,  untempered  kind  that  they 
indulge  in  among  themselves ;  they  have  no  best  and  second-best  forms  of  behaviour  for 
particular  occasions  or  particular  company  ;  but  appear  invariably,  whatever  be  the  season, 
under  the  same  rough  and  every-day  guise. 

But  with  this  total  want  of  any  degree  of  polish,  thdy  are  remarkably  quick  and 
intelligent ;  and  indeed  their  rudeness  is  quite  distinct  in  character  from  that  gross  boor- 
ishness  and  rusticity*  which  we  may  notice  among  the  inhabitants  of  less  populous  counties, 
and  which  are  the  result  of  mere  ignorance  and  inexperience.  They  are  blunt  and 
abrupt  in  their  manners,  but  obviously  rather  from  self-complacency  and  a  high  opinion 
of  their  own  importance,  than  from  any  want  of  familiarity  with  the  formalities  of  social 

life. 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  119 

life.  They  earn  a  great  deal  of  money,  which  tends  also  to  make  them  saucy  and  arrogant, 
and  puts  them  above  the  necessity  of  attending  to  the  suaviter  in  modo ;  the  amenity  of 
manner  and  bent  back  of  the  '  man  of  the  world/  In  Cornwall  and  Devonshire,  and  in 
all  parts  of  Wales  through  which  I  travelled,  I  found  that  a  shilling  would  always  pro- 
cure me  a  service  and  a  bow  with  it :  but  whatever  it  might  purchase  in  Lancashire,  it 
certainly  would  not  bribe  to  civility.  The  people  here  are  fully  aware  of  the  importance 
of  their  labour,  and  take  their  reward  as  a  matter  of  simple  right ;  looking  upon  any 
expression  of  thanks  as  an  unworthy  sign  of  inferiority  and  dependence. 

The  condition  and  circumstances  of  this  part  of  the  country  will  sufficiently  account 
for  the  peculiar  manners  and  disposition  of  its  inhabitants  ;  for  though  there  may  be 
something  in  the  mere  matter  of  plnce,  yet  I  cannot  suppose  that  soil  and  atmosphere 
have  so  much  influence  over  us,  as  to  make  any  material  difference  in  the  morality  of 
Devonshire  and  Lancashire.  The  great  manufacturing  system  is  without  doubt  the  first 
cause  of  all  the  distinctions  that  I  have  noticed ;  this  collects  the  people  in  crowds 
together,  and  putting  more  money  into  their  pockets  than  is  necessary  to  their  support, 
furnishes  them  with  means  and  opportunities  of  dissipation,  that  persons  of  their  rank  and 
character  in  life  must  not  be  expected  to  resist.  Much  vice  and  profligacy  necessarily 
prevail  among  them;  but  while  their  morals  are  corrupted,  the  powers  of  their  minds  are 
called  forth  :  they  become  lawless  and  unprincipled,  but  quick,  cunning,  and  intelligent. 
The  public-houses  are  the  great  schools  of  the  county,  in  which,  under  the  presidency  of 
ale,  the  manners,  habits,  and  opinions  of  the  people  are  fashioned  as  soon  as  each  can 
swallow  his  draught,  and  earn  an  extra  shilling  to  purchase  it.  In  such  seminaries  they 
learn  to  laugh  at  all  moral  restraint,  and  certainly  acquire  no  sound  principles  or  useful 
knowledge;  but  by  a  constant  exercise  of  reasoning,  or  quarrelling,  or  bantering  among 
themselves,  they  gain  an  unusual  shrewdness,  and  great  readiness  and  volubility  of  ex- 
pression. A  Lancashire  man  of  the  class  that  I  am  describing  piques  himself  upon  his 
powers  of  repartee,  and  not  without  reason.  In  the  company  where  I  was  present  at 
Poulton,  I  heard  frequent  bursts  of  humour,  Avhich  a  more  chastened  taste  might  have 
repressed  in  better  society ;  but  which  nevertheless  had  so  much  of  the  real  essence  in 
their  composition,  that  I  ventured  to  be  much  entertained  with  them. 

A  person  unacquainted  with  their  system  of  life  would  scarcely  believe  with  what 
desperate  energy  and  perseverance  these  people  occasionally  devote  themselves  to  the 
revels  of  the  ale-house.  It  is  no  unusual  thing  for  a  man,  who,  by  a  course  of  severe 
industry  and  abstinence,  has  collected  a  stock  of  cash,  to  retire  altogether  from  his  business 
and  his  home,  and  live  for  a  fortnight  at  a  public-house ;  during  the  whole  of  which  time 
his  only  care  is  never  to  allow  himself  to  get  sober.  While  under  the  long  thraldom  of  his 
drinking-fit,  he  is  said,  in  the  provincial  phrase  of  the  county,  to  be  upo  th'order.  When 
he  has  expended  all  his  money,  he  will  return  to  his  employment  and  toil  away 
resolutely  and  cheerfully ;  but  his  industry  benefits  any  body  but  himself;  for  as  soon 

as 


120  VOYAGE    ROUND    GllEAT    niUTAJK 

as  he  has  money  enough  in  his  pocket  to  last  through  such  a  debauch  as  he  thinks  worthy 
of  his  pains,  he  quarters  himself  again  at  the  public-house,  again  to  drink  himself  a 
bankrupt.  I  have  been  informed  by  a  proprietor  of  a  manufactory,  that  several  of  his 
most  skilful  hands  were  men  who  spent  their  time  in  these  alternations  of  drunkenness 
and  industry — fellows  who  would  not  quit  their  drink  while  they  had  a  sixpence  left,  and 
who  would  only  work  that  they  might  return  to  drink  again. 

It  is  melancholy  to  see  a  people  of  so  much  intelligence  the  slaves  of  such  brutal 
profligacy ;  and  I  fear  that  no  effectual  plan  can  be  adopted  for  their  reformation,  as  long 
as  the  manufactories  are  open  to  receive  them.  A  system  of  general  education  might  have 
some  effect  in  awakening  their  pride,  and  fortifying  them  against  evil  impressions ;  but 
there  can  be  no  chance  for  them  as  long  as  their  first  step  from  the  nursery  is  into  the 
manufactory,  and  their  education  picked  up  there  and  at  the  ale-house.  It  appears  from 
the  number  of  trials  which  take  place  annually  at  the  assizes,  that  there  is  more  crime 
committed  in  this  county  than  in  any  other,  (that  of  the  metropolis  excepted),  in  the 
kingdom.  In  the  neighbouring  county  of  York,  which  is  of  so  much  greater  extent,  the 
number  of  trials  are  less  on  an  average  by  nearly  two-thirds. 

I  continued  my  journey  from  Poulton  along  the  eastern  coast  of  Morecambe  Bay. 
As  I  advanced  towards  the  head  of  this  deep  inlet,  the  country  bounding  the  shore  to  my 
right  assumed  a  more  cheerful  and  agreeable  aspect ;  corn,  and  pasture,  and  woods,  suc- 
ceeding to  the  dismal  nakedness  of  marshes  and  sands.  I  left  the  shore  at  Hest-Bank, 
from  whence  the  mail  starts  on  its  passage  across  the  sands  to  Ulverston,  and  proceeding 
for  a  mile  inland,  arrived  at  Bolton,  a  neat  and  pretty  village,  which  a  traveller  in  want  of  a 
breakfast  may  remember  with  some  complacency.  With  the  penalties  and  privations  of 
a  journey  in  Wales  fresh  in  my  recollection,  I  now  found  a  new  kind  of  pleasure  in  the 
comfortable  accommodations  that  I  regularly  met  with  on  the  road.  1  have  not  forgotten 
my  late  entertainment  at  Poulton,  but  there  my  sufferings  were  attributable,  not  to  the 
natural  barrenness  or  beastliness  of  the  house,  but  to  the  outrages  of  a  casual  horde  of 
visitors.  In  Wales  it  was  absolutely  necessary  before  the  commencement  of  a  day's  ex- 
pedition to  summon  a  council  of  the  natives,  in  order  to  note  down  those  houses  in  our 
route  which  were  fit  for  any  one  but  a  native  to  take  shelter  in ;  and  after  all,  our  en- 
tertainment usually  proved  to  be  as  bad  as  possible.  But  now  I  fearlessly  set  out  in  a 
morning  without  plan  or  preparation,  secure  of  finding  in  every  village  through  which  I 
passed  a  clean  lodging  and  eatable  provisions.  1  have  observed  in  no  other  part  of 
England  so  general  an  aspect  of  abundance  and  comfort  in  the  condition  of  all  ranks  of 
people  as  in  Lancashire.  After  having  so  lately  escaped  from  the  black  huts  of  Wales,  I 
was  particularly  struck  with  the  decency  and  respectability  of  the  villages  in  this  county, 
which  bespeak  a  people  not  only  amply  provided  with  all  substantial  necessaries,  but  en- 
joying many  little  comforts  and  luxuries  that  give  a  grace  to  their  domesticlife.  The  eye 
is  offended  by  no  disagreeable  marks  of  poverty,  or  by  its  characteristic  signs  of  dirt  and 

disorder : 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  121 

disorder :  the  cottages  of  the  poorest  class  are  well  built,  and  invariably  distinguished  by 
extreme  neatness  and  cleanliness.  The  people  in  their  external  appearance  are  equally 
well-conditioned,  and  bear  about  them  the  same  comfortable  signs  of  ease  and  competency. 
Every  body  that  one  meets  is  well  clothed,  and  bears  in  a  plump,  careless  countenance, 
the  proofs  of  being  well  fed.  The  peasantry  of  Lancashire  are  the  sturdiest  and  finest  set 
of  men  that  I  have  ever  seen.  They  have  the  credit  of  having,  together  with  great  bodily 
strength,  a  high  and  daring  spirit,  and  of  possessing,  in  their  utmost  perfection,  John  Bull's 
taste  and  talent  for  fighting,  with  all  his  well-known  bravery  and  bottom.  They  live  upon 
good  substantial  food,  Avhich,  I  am  inclined  to  believe,  has  much  to  do  in  the  excite- 
ment and  support  of  their  elevated  spirit.  Courage  and  chivalry  flourished  in  Don  Quixote, 
independent  of  any  assistance  from  breakfast  and  dinner ;  but  we  know  very  well  that 
in  more  vulgar  minds  they  are  not  a  little  aided  by  a  proper  allowance  of  meat  and  bread. 
The  Lancashire  men  seem  to  have  had  the  luck  of  being  amply  fed  from  a  remote 
period.  In  an  ancient  poem  of  Flodden  Field,  by  Benson,  they  are  described  as  gifted 
with  uncommon  strength  and  fierceness,  and  both  these  qualities  are  attributed  mainly 
to  the  nature  of  their  diet.  In  the  following  extract  the  people  are  called  forth  from  the 
glens,  and  hills,  and  moors,  round  Morecambe  Bay;  and  I  believe  that  such  a  host,  with 
the  same  character  and  disposition,  might  be  found  in  the  same  places  at  the  present  day. 
I  give  the  extract  more  for  its  facts  than  its  poetry,  which  seems  to  be  little  more  than 
the  art  of  alliteration. 

"  Sir  Edward  Stanley  stiff  in  stoure, 

"  He  is  the  man  of  whom  I  mean ; 
"  With  him  did  pass  a  mighty  power, 

"  Of  soldiers  seemly  to  be  seen. 

"  Most  lively  lads  in  Lonsdale  bred, 

"  With  weapons  of  unwieldly  weight; 
"  All  such  as  Tatham-Fells  had  fed, 

"  Went  under  Stanley's  streamer  bright. 

"  From  Rowland  billman  bold  were  boun, 

"  With  such  as  Bolton-banks  did  hide, 
"  From  Wharemore  up  to  Whitttngton, 

"  And  all  to  Wenning  water-side. 

<(  From  Silverdale  to  Kent-sand  side, 

"  Whose  soil  is  sown  with  cockle-shells  ; 
"  From  Cartmel  eke,  and  Conny  side, 

•'  With  fellows  fierce  from  Furness-fells. 

"  All  Lancashire  for  the  most  part, 

"  The  lusty  Stanley  stout  did  lead ; 
*'  A  stock  of  striplings,  strong  of  heart, 

"  Brought  up  from  babes  with  beef  and  bread. 
VOL.  II.  R  „  From 


122  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

"  From  Poulton  and  Preston  with  pikes, 

"  They  with  the  Stanley  stout  forth  went ; 
"  From  Pemberton  and  Pilling  dikes, 

"  For  battle  billmen  bold  were  bent. 

"  With  fellows  fresh  and  fierce  in  fights, 

"  "Which  Morton-fields  turn'd  out  in  scores ; 
"  With  lusty  lads Liver  and  Lights — 

"  From  Blackburn  and  Bolton  i'th' Moors." 

I  continued  my  route  from  Bolton  towards  the  head  of  Morecambe  Bay»  through  a 
pleasing  and  well-cultivated  country,  now  gladdening  the  eye  with  the  promise  of  a 
speedy  and  abundant  harvest.  It  is  thickly  peopled ;  and  the  traveller  is  entertained  in 
his  day's  journey  by  a  rapid  succession  of  villages,  hamlets,  and  farms,  all  marked  with 
the  same  air  of  smiling  neatness  and  comfort,  and  indicating  a  general  condition  among 
the  people  of  ease  and  competency.  This  was  a  land  well  calculated,  one  should  have 
thought,  to  put  a  man  in  good  humour  with  life ;  but  some  of  us  are  strangely  perverse 
animals,  and  not  least  inclined  to  grumble  when  circumstances  about  us  seem  best  dis- 
posed to  make  us  content.  As  I  was  walking  along,  I  perceived  at  a  little  distance  before 
me  an  old  soldier  and  a  countryman,  who,  I  found  on  joining  them  both,  was  a  native  of 
Bolton.  They  were  conversing  earnestly  together,  as  well  on  matters  of  general  interest, 
as  relating  to  their  own  particular  fortunes;  and  when  the  nature  of  their  respective  con- 
ditions is  considered,  the  temper  of  their  minds  was  certainly  curiously  contrasted.  The 
soldier  had  served  for  a  considerable  time  with  Lord  Wellington  in  Spain,  and  was  now 
travelling  homewards,  worn  out,  foot-sore,  and  almost  penniless,  to  see  his  friends,  who 
lived  in  the  north  of  Cumberland.  He  talked  over  numerous  and  extreme  hardships  that 
he  had  suffered  in  his  course  of  campaigning,  but  thanked  God  that  he  had  escaped  with 
all  his  limbs  whole,  and  adverted  to  his  present  humble  state  without  intimating  or  seem- 
ing to  feel  that  it  was  but  a  scurvy  reward  for  all  the  perils  to  which  he  had  been  exposed. 
I  thought  there  was  something  truly  admirable  in  the  complacency  of  his  manner  as  he 
limped  along  and  told  us  the  long  story  of  his  toil,  and  wants,  and  sufferings :  not  a  word 
of  complaint  escaped  him ;  he  talked  of  the  penalties  of  his  profession  as  perfectly  just 
and  natural,  and  seemed  to  find  an  excuse  to  his  own  feelings  for  being  bare-foot  and 
half-starved,  in  the  mere  circumstance  of  his  being  a  soldier. 

The  countryman,  a  stout,  ruddy-faced  fellow,  who,  whatever  might  be  his  wrongs, 
had  the  appearance  of  having  never  missed  a  meal  in  his  life,  heard  the  story  of  his  com- 
panion with  feelings  very  different  from  those  of  the  reporter,  and  interrupted  him  frpm 
time  to  time  with  great  heat  to  deplore  the  calamities  of  Avar,  and  heartily  to  curse  the 
makers  of  it.  Thus  far  I  could  bear  with  him  very  well ;  but  he  at  length  burst  out 
into  some  bitter  complaints  about  his  own  personal  grievances,  which  were  not  at  all 
justified  by  his  jolly,  well-fed  figure,  and  were  opposed  with  a  very  ill  grace  to  the 

patience 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GRBAT    BRITAIN  123 

patience  and  good  humour  of  the  soldier.  He  was  loud  in  his  denunciations  against  His 
Majesty's  ministers,  whose  misdeeds,  he  protested,  particularly  as  to  the  window-tax,  and 
the  mode  of  raising  the  militia,  had  made  life  at  Bolton  scarcely  worth  an  Englishman's 
care.  He  admitted  that  breakfast,  dinner,  and  supper,  were  still  left  to  him,  and  all  this 
daily ;  but  what  was  all  this,  he  asked,  when  a  tax-gatherer  might  enter  his  house  as  he 
pleased,  and,  on  various  iniquitous  pretences,  take  from  him  more  money  than  would 
supply  him  with  ale,  that  the  ministers  might  ride  in  their  coaches.  He  said  much  more ; 
but  it  is  not  worth  while  to  follow  him  in  his  invectives  further.  The  soldier,  more  accus- 
tomed to  discipline  and  subordination,  had  a  very  different  opinion  of  the  conduct  of 
ministers,  trusting,  with  an  extravagance  of  liberality,  that  all  they  did  was  for  the  best. 
Unlike  the  countryman,  he  found  some  relief  for  his  own  sorrows  and  sufferings  in  the 
general  glory  of  his  country,  and  parted  from  us  with  a  patriotic  sally,  that  reminded  me 
of  Goldsmith's  reduced  and  mutilated  soldier  in  the  "  Citizen  of  the  World,"  with  his  last 
triumphant  ejaculation  of  "  Liberty,  Property,  and  Old  England  for  ever." 

After  a  walk  of  three  or  four  miles,  I  arrived  at  the  village  of  Warton,  situated  near 
the  foot  of  Warton  Crag,  a  lofty,  rocky  hill,  which  on  one  side  shelves  down  to  the  edge 
of  the  bay.  I  had  been  told  that  I  should  find  some  remains  of  an  ancient  fortification 
on  its  summit ;  and  I  toiled  up  it  with  the  certainty,  if  I  saw  nothing  else,  of  being  gra- 
tified with  a  fine  view.  The  hill  is  of  rather  difficult  ascent  towards  the  summit,  where  it 
is  guarded  round  by  huge  walls  of  limestone  rock,  and  has  a  very  rude  and  savage  aspect. 
On  its  highest  point  are  some  remains  of  a  round  tower,  said  to  have  been  a  beacon,  and 
used  probably  to  give  warning  to  the  country  in  times  of  danger.  Here  my  attention  was 
immediately  arrested  by  the  prospect  around  me,  which  was  of  extraordinary  extent,  and 
incomparable  for  beauty,  grandeur,  and  variety.  Morecambe  Bay  lay  expanded  beneath 
me  to  the  west,  almost  inclosed  like  a  lake ;  and  round  this  great  sheet  of  water,  smooth 
and  brilliant,  the  eye  expatiated  over  a  country  beautiful  and  richly  diversified,  and 
swelling  in  the  distance  into  mountains  and  hills  of  endlessly  varied  forms,  which  bounded 
the  whole  horizon  round  the  land  in  one  unbroken  amphitheatre.  Along  the  whole  eastern 
side  of  the  bay  the  coast  is  uniformly  low,  and  beyond  it  a  level  and  fertile  country  ex- 
tends far  inland  to  the  base  of  the  Lancashire  Fells.  On  this  side  the  fore-ground  was 
embellished  by  the  windings  of  the  Lune,  and  the  town  of  Lancaster,  with  its  high-raised 
castle ;  and  further  north,  on  the  same  border  of  the  bay,  the  whole  country,  seen  under 
a  clear  sky  and  a  bright  sun,  smiling  with  corn  and  pasture,  and  enlivened  by  numerous 
villages  and  farms,  composed  a  most  exhilarating  and  delightful  landscape.  At  the  head 
of  the  bay,  a  country  equally  fertile  and  beautiful  appeared  stretching  to  the  foot  of  the 
mountains,  but  broken  along  the  coast  by  some  rugged  and  barren  hills,  detached  from 
the  main  chain,  and  advanced  to  the  sea.  Warton  Crag  is  among  these,  and  Arnside 
Knot,  and  Whitbarrow  Scar,  at  the  southernmost  point  of  Westmoreland.  These  hills, 
which  are  all  composed  of  grey  limestone,  are  roughened  cm  their  summits  by  piles  of 

R  2  bare 


124  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

bare  and  broken  rock,  and  are  strikingly  contrasted  with  the  decorated  and  graceful  land- 
scape which  they  interrupt.  The  great  chain  of  mountains  and  hills  circumscribing  this 
various  and  expanded  prospect  described  a  grand  and  deep-drawn  crescent,  more  than  a 
hundred  miles  in  extent.  Occupying  its  southern  horn  were  the  Fells  of  Lancashire,  not 
rising  to  more  than  the  dignity  of  hills,  and  mellowed  by  long  distance,  and  a  soft  aerial 
tint.  Nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  curve  towered  the  huge  square  summit  of  Ingleborough, 
in  Yorkshire,  and  from  thence  to  its  north-western  point  the  whole  space  was  filled  up  by 
the  mountains  of  the  lakes;  a  majestic  range,  spiring  up,  mountain  beyond  mountain,  like 
the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  bare  and  ragged  pinnacles  of  the  Coniston  Fells,  which  were 
least  remote,  were  the  most  conspicuous  features,  though,  as  the  eye  passed  along  the 
whole  range,  it  was  still  surprised  by  new  forms  of  ruggedness  and  grandeur,  and  by  per- 
petual variations  in  the  figure  and  expression,  and  the  grouping  and  combination  of  these 
magnificent  objects.  I  saw  them  under  a  good  effect:  the  day  was  intensely  hot;  and 
there  was  a  thin  white  haze  in  the  distance,  which  was  spread  all  over  the  mountains,  so 
that  I  looked  at  them  as  through  a  sheet  of  gauze,  behind  which  they  appeared  somewhat 
obscured  and  shadowy,  but  enlarged  beyond  their  natural  magnitude.  I  made  a  second 
visit  to  the  crag  in  the  evening,  when  the  atmosphere  in  the  distance  was  clearer ;  and 
I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  this  celebrated  range  of  mountains  to  the  greatest  ad- 
vantage, with  their  long  and  broken  line  of  summit  figured  out  with  perfect  distinctness 
against  a  pure,  cold  sky. 

On  exploring  \Varton  Crag  in  search  of  those  remains  of  ancient  art,  which  were  the 
first  objects  of  my  visit  to  the  spot,  I  was  happy  to  find  that  I  had  not,  as  on  many  similar 
occasions,  been  misled,  though  more  from  that  general  dislike  which  one  has  to  be  de- 
ceived on  any  subject,  than  from  the  intrinsic  value  and  interest  of  the  matters  which  pre- 
sented themselves  to  my  curiosity.  The  hill  has  very  evidently  been  the  site  of  a  British 
fortification,  or  one  of  a  remote  period,  when  the  arts  of  attack  and  defence  were  very  rude 
and  primitive.  On  the  south  side  of  it,  about  midway  up,  I  observed  several  circular 
inclosures,  made  by  earth- works,  of  inconsiderable  height,  but  probably  reduced  since 
their  first  formation.  An  old  shepherd,  who  had  grown  grey  without  ever  wandering 
half  a  dozen  miles  from  the  spot,  told  me  that  he  remembered  the  time  when  there  were 
several  other  inclosures  here,  guarded  by  circular  walls ;  that  the  stones  had  been  removed 
to  make  a  wall  along  a  road  which  leads  over  the  crag,  and  that  on  digging  for  some 
of  them  under  ground,  great  quantities  of  human  bones  had  been  brought  to  light. 
I  did  not  see  any  of  these  bones,  nor  could  I  learn  where  they  are  deposited ;  but 
whatever  and  wherever  they  are,  they  are  considered  as  indisputable  evidences  in  this 
neighbourhood  that  the  inclosures  were  military  works,  and  that  hosts  of  warriors  have 
fallen  and  been  buried  among  them.  The  bones,  as  usual,  were  of  an  enormous  size, 
proving  that  our  ancestors,  if  not  wiser  and  better,  were  infinitely  bigger  than  we  are. 
This  part  of  the  hill  is  very  easy  of  approach,  and  ill  calculated  for  a  place  of  defence ; 

but 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  125 

but  higher  up  it  is  more  strongly  guarded  by  nature,  and  bears  the  traces  of  a  more  inge- 
nious application  of  art.  The  summit  is  belted  round  with  a  high  rampart  of  rock ;  but 
on  the  northern  front,  where  this  natural  defence  is  imperfect,  the  deficiency  has  been 
supplied  by  a  wall,  formed  of  unhewn  stones,  piled  together  without  cement — a  rude  and 
clumsy  work,  though  exceedingly  strong.  The  greater  part  of  it  has  been  overthrown ; 
but  it  may  still  be  traced  in  its  whole  extent;  and  from  the  shapeless  heaps  of  stones  we 
may  still  form  some  idea  of  the  industry,  if  not  the  ingenuity,  of  the  founders.  The  inha- 
bitants of  the  country  round,  for  miles  from  the  spot,  with  all  their  cattle,  might  have 
been  contained  within  the  inclosed  spar^,  where  a  few  men  might  have  protected  them 
against  any  number  of  assailants.  There  is  no  provision  for  water,  and  no  traces  of  any 
places  of  shelter  for  man  or  beast  within  the  fortress ;  but  without  such  accommodations 
it  might  have  been  serviceable  as  a  temporary  retreat  during  the  hasty  incursions  to  which 
the  country  was  incessantly  exposed  in  remote  times. 

On  leaving  Warton,  a  short  walk  to  the  northward  led  me  into  the  southern  extre- 
mity of  Westmoreland,  which,  it  may  be  perceived,  on  referring  to  the  map,  thrusts  itself 
down  in  a  very  unbecoming  manner,  as  it  appears  upon  paper,  upon  Morecambe  Bay, 
cutting  off  a  piece  of  Lancashire,  and  leaving  it  a  perfect  exile  from  the  main  body.  I 
am  not  acquainted  with  the  history  of  metes  and  bounds  in  this  part  of  the  world,  and 
therefore  cannot  explain  the  cause  of  this  irregular  intermixture  of  shires,  nor  which  of 
the  two  is  liable  to  the  charge  of  undue  encroachment.  Milthorp  was  the  only  town  in 
Westmoreland  that  could  claim  a  visit  from  me  as  a  coast-town ;  and  its  pretensions  to 
this  denomination  may,  perhaps,  be  questioned.  It  is  a  small  mean  place,  with  nothing 
in  it  worth  the  notice  of  a  traveller;  but  the  country  about  it  is  beautiful  enough  to  com- 
pensate to  him  for  the  trouble  of  his  visit,  and  keep  him  in  good  humour.  A  little  detached 
from  the  town  is  Kellam  Tower,  the  seat  of  — —  Wilson,  Esq.  a  handsome  mansion, 
situated  at  the  foot  of  a  richly  wooded  hill,  on  the  banks  of  the  Kent,  a  shallow,  but 
silent  and  brilliant  stream.  About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  south  of  Milthorp  this  small  river 
forms  an  extensive  estuary;  at  low  water  a  plain  of  sand,  which  opens  into  Morecambe 
Bay.  As  seen  from  the  eastern  side,  nothing  can  be  more  striking  than  the  combined 
grandeur  and  beauty  of  the  coasts  and  the  distant  mountains,  that  appear  drawn  round 
this  deep  inlet.  The  channel  spreads  at  its  head  into  a  wide  and  regularly  formed 
crescent,  bounded  by  a  lofty  hill,  sloping  rapidly  to  the  shore,  with  patches  of  corn  and 
grass  on  its  front,  interspersed  amongst  heath  and  coppice- wood.  The  bleached  front  of 
Whitbarrow  Scar,  a  terrible  precipice,  was  directly  opposite  to  me,  on  the  western  side  of 
the  estuary,  from  whence  a  long  line  of  coast  appeared  stretching  to  the  southward,  diver- 
sified by  various  bays,  and  bold  and  picturesque  promontories,  formed  by  some  insulated 
crags,  which  at  intervals  break  the  level  border  of  the  shore,  and  jut  far  into  the  sea- 
Beyond  these  crags,  which  are  all  covered  with  wood,  towered  the  bare  peaks  of  the 
Coniston  Fells ;  and  all  round  the  inlet  the  distance  was  crowded  with  the  summits  of 

mountains, 


126  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

mountains,  of  all  rude  and  awful  forms,  and  marked  by  a  thousand  shades  of  colouring) 
according  to  their  places  in  the  distance.  As  I  stood  looking  at  this  noble  panorama,  the 
water  was  silently  creeping  in,  and  diffusing  itself  in  a  white  mirror  over  the  sand,  in 
which  every  wooded  promontory  that  varied  its  margin  was  vividly  represented.  The 
plan  of  my  excursion  denied  me  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  lakes ;  but  the  frequent  inlets 
which  intersect  this  coast  have  much  the  same  character ;  they  have  the  same  placid  and 
sequestered  appearance,  and  if  rarely  the  same  fertile  border,  they  are  girt  round  in  a 
wider  circle  by  the  same  magnificent  mountains. 

It  is  only,  however,  for  a  very  limited  time*  during  every  tide,  that  this  estuary  of  the 
Kent  can  boast  the  aspect  of  a  lake,  for  the  flood  advances  so  sluggishly,  that  it  is  nearly 
high  water  before  the  sands  are  completely  covered ;  and  the  ebb  retreats  altogether  with 
as  much  rapidity.  The  whole  channel  is  very  shallow,  and  towards  the  upper  part  there 
is  scarcely  water  enough  for  a  small  boat.  I  waited  to  cross  the  ferry  near  the  sand-head 
till  high  water,  when,  obeying  a  hasty  summons  from  the  ferryman,  I  jumped  into  the 
boat,  and  we  put  off  in  a  moment ;  but,  with  all  our  exertions,  we  were  disgraced  in  a 
race  against  the  ebb ;  and  after  ploughing  our  way  for  some  time  keel-deep  in  the  sands* 
were  finally  fixed  aground,  beyond  all  hope  of  extrication,  in  mid-channel.  The  boat, 
happily,  was  the  only  thing  completely  disabled  by  this  mischance ;  for  in  the  course  of 
a  few  minutes  the  sands  under  us  were  dry,  and  we  were  enabled  to  escape  from  the 
wreck,  and  walk  the  remainder  of  our  passage. 

I  found  the  journey  along  shore,  towards  the  mouth  of  the  estuary,  very  tedious  and 
troublesome,  being  frequently  put  out  of  my  way  by  the  crags  which  project  into  the  sea, 
and  obliged  to  make  laborious  circuits  over  tracts  of  moss  and  swamp.  The  whole  country 
bordering  the  shore  on  this  western  side  is  a  peat-moss,  except  where  broken  by  these  few 
detached  crags,  which  are  singularly  scattered  over  this  level  surface.  They  all  consist  of 
limestone;  and  though  with  very  little  soil  upon  them,  are  thickly  covered  with  mountain- 
ash  and  oak,  whose  roots  shoot  down  into  fissures  in  the  rock,  and  find  nourishment  enough, 
I  know  not  from  what,  to  swell  them  into  tolerable  growth.  These  wooded  headlands 
give  an  effect  of  great  richness  and  elegance  to  the  scenery  of  the  coast.  The  first  that  I 
encountered  was  Midip  Fell,  with  a  long  steep  front  jutting  far  into  the  channel,  which 
forms  one  point  of  a  semicircular  bay,  bounded  at  its  southern  extremity  by  Blath,  another 
promontory,  most  picturesquely  broken  and  varied  by  an  intermixture  of  rock  and  wood. 
Nearly  in  the  centre  of  the  bay  is  Castle-Head,  a  singular  crag,  rising  very  precipitously 
from  the  water,  and  crowned  with  a  luxuriant  thicket  of  wood,  amidst  which  is  seen  some 
little  ornamental  building,  which,  with  scraps  of  the  path  and  railing  leading  to  it,  has  a 
very  pretty  effect.  At  its  base,  on  the  north  side,  close  upon  the  shore,  stands  an  elegant 
villa,  with  a  line  of  trees,  at  the  water's  edge,  skreening  it  on  one  side,  and  the  grounds 
about  it  embellished  with  every  tasteful  addition  practicable  in  the  situation.  This  man- 
sion struck  me  as  a  most  delightful  and  inviting  habitation.  Nothing  could  be  more 

beautiful 


Castle-head,  Westmorland 


Peel  Castle,  Lancashire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  127 

beautiful  than  the  whole  form  of  the  bay  of  which  it  is  a  prominent  ornament;  and  at  this 
distance  down  the  channel  there  was  still  a  smooth  clear  sea  before  it,  in  which  every 
feature  on  the  coast  was  seen  distinctly  imaged,  and  waving  and  trembling  as  the  water 
silently  swelled  to  the  shore. 

There  is  a  good  view  from  this  place  of  both  coasts  of  the  estuary:  the  eastern  side  is 
not  so  prettily  varied  as  that  already  described,  being  bounded  by  the  long  and  uniform 
fronts  of  two  lofty  hills.  A  little  south  of  the  promontory  of  Blath  the  estuary  opens  into 
Morecambe  Bay,  which  is  divided,  at  its  head,  into  two  parts  by  the  district  of  Cartmel; 
a  peninsula  several  miles  in  length,  for  the  most  part  lofty,  rugged,  and  barren,  but  termi- 
nating at  its  southern  extremity  in  an  extensive  flat,  called  Windermere  Marsh.  Its 
eastern  coast,  down  to  the  Marsh,  is  bold  and  picturesque,  being  formed  by  the  long  and 
mountainous  ridges  of  Grange  and  Flookborough>  which  present  a  steep  front  to  the  sea, 
rocky  and  broken,  and  darkened  and  enriched  with  thickets  of  coppice  wood.  Passing  by 
the  mouth  of  the  Kent,  I  re-entered  Lancashire.  If  the  case  were  to  be  decided  by  natural 
signs  of  affinity,  this  county  would  have  no  title  to  this  detached  limb,  which  has  a  very 
distinct  appearance  from  every  other  part  of  it,  and  from  its  rude  and  mountainous  cha- 
racter appears  to  be  properly  connected  with  Westmoreland. 

After  a  long  and  very  rough  walk,  I  concluded  the  labour  and  amusement  of  the  day 
at  the  small  village  of  Grange^  which  I  found  dignified  by  an  admirable  inn ;  the  sumptu- 
ousness  of  whose  accommodation*  is  rather  more  than  a  traveller  might  expect  in  so  rude 
and  remote  a  tract.  It  is  supported  in  this  style  of  splendour  by  the  summer  visits  of 
strangers  who  come  hither  to  bathe.  The  situation  of  the  village  is  secluded  and  exceed- 
ingly romantic :  the  cottages  are  irregularly  scattered,  singly  and  in  little  groups,  on  the 
steep  front  of  the  great  hill  of  Grange,  imbosomed  in  wood,  through  the  breaks  of  which 
appears  the  sea,  and  overhung  by  the  rude  summit  of  the  hill,  which  rises  to  a  great  height 
above  them,  a  waste  of  heath  and  rock.  In  spite  of  my  fatigue,  I  climbed  to  the  top  of 
this  hill,  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  sun  set,  and  was  gratified  with  certainly  one  of  the 
finest  prospects  in  the  country;  an  immense  expanse  of  sea,  spread  like  a  sheet  of  gold, 
under  a  sky  all  glowing  with  redness,,  and  a  vast  chain  of  mountains  unobscured  by  a  cloud, 
and  distinct  even  to  every  cleft,  and  ridge,  and  pinnacle  on  their  shivered  summits. 

I  made  an  excursion  from  Grange  to  Cartmel,  which  lies  about  two  miles  north-west 
of  it,  in  a  romantic  glen,  well  wooded,  and  encompassed  by  high,  dark,  rocky  hills.  The 
town  is  mean,  and  laid  out  with  an  awkwardness  most  complete,  that  despises  both  ap- 
pearance and  convenience;  but  it  contains  an  ancient  Gothic  church  of  great  beauty  and 
elegance,  which,  in  such  a  neighbourhood,  surprises  the  eye  with  the  utmost  charms  of 
contrast.  It  is  built  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  has  a  square  tower  on  a  singular  plan, 
being  composed  of  two  parts,  one  growing  out  of  the  other,  and  each  terminated  by  battle- 
ments. The  interior  is  spacious  and  well  proportioned,  but  less  enriched  with  sculptural 
decoration  than  we  usually  find  in  buildings  of  this  order  of  architecture.  In  the  choir  is 

a  very 


128  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN". 

a  very  handsome  tomb,  bearing  effigies  of  a  knight  and  his  lady ;  the  knight  supposed 
to  have  been  Sir  John  de  Harrington,  who  was  knighted  by  Edward  the  First,  at  Carlisle, 
whither  he  had  been  summoned  to  meet  that  monarch,  and  attend  him  on  his  expedition 
into  Scotland.  The  figures  lie  under  a  richly  carved  canopy ;  that  of  the  knight  cross- 
legged,  the  sign  of  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land. 

Cartmel  is  a  place  of  high  antiquity,  and  was  the  site  of  a  town  as  early  perhaps  as 
there  was  any  place  that  could  honestly  be  called  a  town  in  the  country.  The  whole  district 
of  Cartmel,  with  its  capital,  known  by  the  rugged  title  of  Sudgedluit,  was  granted  by  Egfrid, 
a  king  of  Northumberland  in  the  seventh  century,  to  St.  Cuthbert,  together  with  all  its 
British  inhabitants.  Why  this  worthy  saint  coveted  so  much  of  this  world  does  not  ap- 
pear. A  priory  of  regular  canons,  of  the  order  of  St.  Augustine,  was  founded  here  in 
1188,  by  William  Mareschal,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  and  endowed  by  him  with  large  posses- 
sions and  many  valuable  privileges.  It  appears  to  have  been  an  object  of  extraordinary 
regard  in  the  mind  of  this  pious  earl>  who  was  not  only  supremely  liberal  in  his  grants  to  it, 
but  careful  to  secure  them,  by  a  most  vehement  manifesto  of  his  ill-will  against  all  who 
should  presume  to  disturb  the  liberties  of  his  favoured  recluses.  He  sums  up  the  charter  of 
the  prior}'  in  the  following  emphatic  manner : — "  This  house  I  have  founded  for  the 
increase  of  our  holy  religion,  giving  and  granting  to  it  every  kind  of  liberty  the  heart  can 
conceive  or  the  mouth  utter;  and  whosoever  shall  infringe  these  their  immunities,  or  injure 
the  said  monastery,  may  he  incur  the  curse  of  God,  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  all  the 
saints,  as  well  as  my  particular  malediction."  The  bathos  of  this  pitiless  anathema  is 
admirable. 

I  returned  to  Grange,  and  proceeded  two  miles  further  south  to  visit  Holy  well,  a  spa 
of  peculiar  efficacy  in  scorbutic  complaints,  but  likely,  if  the  attendant  there  be  not 
egregiously  deceived  or  deceiving,  to  relieve  a  man  from  any  disease  with  which  he  may  be 
afflicted.  The  spring  rises  close  to  the  shore,  under  a  rocky  promontory  called  Hum- 
phrey Head.  The  chief  good  of  the  water  consists  in  its  effect  as  a  gentle  aperient ;  though 
it  is  impossible  to  say  what  virtue  it  may  not  retain  from  the  benediction  of  the  saint,  with 
which,  as  its  name  should  signify,  it  has  been  honoured.  There  is  another  spring  in  this 
district,  called  Cartmel  Well,  which  divides  with  this  spa  the  faith  and  favour  of  the 
people,  as  a  remedy  for  scorbutic  disorders. 

South  of  Humphrey  Head  the  coast  sinks  into  a  flat  sand,  which  continues  to  the 
extremity  of  the  peninsula,  bordering  Windermere  Marsh.  This  level  tract  has  been 
drained  and  brought  into  cultivation  within  these  twenty  years,  and  now  yields  abundant 
crops  of  grass  and  corn,  and  is  the  most  valuable  portion  of  the  peninsula.  From  the  spa 
I  crossed  over  to  the  village  of  Flookborough,  on  the  eastern  side  of  Cartmel,  and  took  my 
place  in  a  coach  which  passes  over  the  Leven  Sands  to  Ulverston.  These  sands,  which 
form  a  part  of  Morecambe  Bay,  derive  their  name  from  the  small  river  Leven,  which 
flows  over  them  to  the  sea,  and  is  navigable  at  high  water,  as  far  as  the  tide  advances,  for 

vessels 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  12Q 

vessels  of  considerable  burthen,  but  fordable  from  half  ebb  to  half  flood.  The  sands  are 
muddy  and  soft,  making  the  passage  of  a  carriage  tedious  and  laborious;  but  there  are  no 
places  on  them  where  there  is  any  danger  of  a  coach,  with  all  the  passengers  inside  and 
outside,  and  all  the  horses,  being  swallowed  up  in  one  grave ;  though  one  may  hear  such  a 
casualty  spoken  of  in  the  neighbourhood  as  possible,  in  defiance  of  daily  experience.  A 
guide  on  horseback  attends  in  all  weathers  at  the  river's  side  to  point  out  the  ford,  and  he 
has  so  attended  for  many  years,  without  being  convinced  that  the  road  over  the  sands  is 
more  dangerous  than  any  road  on  shore,  if  passengers  will  submit  to  be  guided  by  him. 
In  the  winter  time  the  duty  of  this  poor  fellow  is  terribly  severe;  for  here  he  is  stationed  on 
this  exposed  and  cheerless  plain  in  gales  of  wind,  or  in  rain,  or  frost,  or  snow,  for  six  hours 
of  every  day.  Nevertheless,  though  an  elderly  man,  he  looks  healthy,  and,  having  survived 
through  many  winters  of  this  rough  seasoning,  may  hope  to  have  acquired  a  hardihood  now 
quite  element-proof.  He  receives  a  small  salary  for  his  services,  I  believe,  from  govern- 
ment, which  is  improved  by  the  voluntary  gifts  of  passengers  into  a  decent  subsistence 
for  him. 

When  the  tide  is  in,  this  estuary  of  the  Leven,  like  that  of  the  Kent,  has  the  appear- 
ance of  a  fine  lake,  and  its  boundaries  are  equally  bold  and  beautiful.  On  the  eastern 
side  stands  Cartmel  Fell,  with  a  long,  dark,  precipitous  front,  streaked  with  sheets  of  stones, 
that  have  streamed  down  from  its  rocky  summit,  and  decorated  here  and  there  at  its  base 
with  stripes  and  patches  of  corn.  On  the  opposite  side  a  wider  extent  of  country  is  dis- 
covered, and  of  a  milder  character,  exhibiting  a  pleasing  variety  of  hill  and  dale,  richly 
spread  with  vegetation,  and  peopled  with  villages ;  and  at  the  head  of  the  bay  appear,  in 
sublime  confusion,  the  mingled  summits  of  the  mountains.  I  always  feel  humbled  and 
mortified  on  attempting  to  reduce  such  scenes  as  these  to  description.  The  eye  compre- 
hends the  whole  scenery,  that  I  have  just  described,  in  one  view,  with  all  its  parts  aiding, 
improving,  and  relieving  each  other,  by  their  modes  of  combination  and  contrast.  But  it 
is  not  possible  for  words  to  bring  the  picture  before  the  mind  in  this  condensed  and 
collective  form ;  and  even  if  each  part  in  the  composition  could  be  represented  with  the 
force  and  distinctness  of  reality,  yet,  in  a  description  of  several  sentences,  the  mind 
becomes  confused  and  divided  in  its  attention,  and  loses  the  unity  and  keeping  of  one 
great  and  general  impression. 

Ulverston,  which  is  situated  on  the  western  side  of  the  Leven,  and  about  a  mile  from 
the  shore,  is  a  neat  and  pleasant  town,  though  containing  nothing  that  a  tourist  might  not 
pass  by  unnoticed,  without  any  reproach  to  his  conscience.  It  is  the  little  capital  of 
Furness,  and  drives  a  trade  suitable  to  the  necessities  of  this  limited  district ;  holds  out 
to  the  gay  and  luxurious  the  temptations  of  a  theatre  and  an  assembly  room,  and  to 
the  studious  or  the  indolent  the  convenience  of  a  subscription  library.  Its  own  manufac- 
tures consist  of  cotton,  checks,  canvas,  and  hats ;  and  it  exports  iron-ore,  wrought  iron, 
limestone,  and  slates  procured  from  the  neighbouring  hills.  Vessels  of  a  hundred  and 

VOL.  ii.  s  fifty 


130  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

fifty  tons  burthen  could  formerly  advance  up  to  the  town,  by  means  of  a  canal  cut  in 
1795,  and  forming  a  communication  with  the  channel  of  the  Leven ;  but  very  lately  the 
river  has  changed  its  course,  and  left  the  canal  perfectly  useless,  and  the  town,  after 
having  laid  out  an  immense  sum  in  its  formation,  again  saddled  with  the  expense  of  land- 
carriage  for  all  its  exports  and  imports. 

I  rejoined  my  friend,  Mr.  Daniel,  at  this  place,  and  we  proceeded  in  company  to  ex* 
plore  the  coasts  of  Lower  Furness,  a  peninsula,  washed  on  its  eastern  coast  by  Morecambe 
Bay,  and  on  its  west  side  detached  from  the  county  of  Cumberland  by  the  estuary  of  the 
river  Dudden.  This  district  once  contained  one  of  the  richest  monasteries  in  the  kingdom, 
and  though  not  generally  distinguished  by  that  fertility  of  soil  which  we  usually  observe 
in  the  possessions  of  the  church,  had  a  paramount  recommendation  in  its  insulated  situa- 
tion, which  secured  it  against  the  depredations  of  the  Scottish  borderers. 

About  three  miles  south  of  Ulverston  is  Conishead  Priory,  the  seat  of  Colonel 
Braddyl,  a  delightful  spot,  and  worthy,  at  least  beyond  every  other  part  of  the  district, 
of  the  high  name  with  which  Mr.  West,  its  historian,  has  vouchsafed  in  his  enthusiasm 
to  honour  it,  the  Paradise  of  Furness.  The  house,  which  is  an  old  venerable  looking 
structure,  somewhat  scandalized  by  white-wash,  stands  in  the  centre  of  a  beautiful  park, 
diversified  by  great  inequalities  of  surface,  and  planted  with  lines  and  groups  of  trees, 
which  have  attained  a  fine  growth.  To  the  east  appears  the  sea  in  Morecambe  Bay, 
with  the  castle  of  Lancaster  faintly  pictured  on  its  opposite  coast;  and  to  the  north,  a  fine 
contrast  to  the  green  and  wooded  knolls  of  the  park,  soar  the  huge  naked  tops  of  the 
mountains. 

Opposite  to  the  house,  and  about  a  mile  from  the  shore,  is  a  small,  low,  rocky  island, 
called  Chapel  Island,  with  the  gable-end  of  a  building  upon  it,  intended  to  pass  for  the 
remains  of  a  chapel  that  once  stood  there,  an  appendage  to  Furness  Abbey,  in  which  a 
priest  daily  put  up  his  prayers  for  the  safety  of  passengers  across  the  sands.  When  seen 
from  a  distance  the  thing  does  very  well,  and  one  has  no  suspicion  of  treachery ;  but  on  a 
nearer  survey  one  perceives,  at  least  I  imagined  I  perceived,  from  something  of  a  more 
finical  and  fantastic  taste  than  can  be  attributed  to  time  or  the  weather,  that  this  ruin  is 
just  as  it  came  from  the  hands  of  some  very  modern  mason.  I  may  be  wrong  in  some 
measure;  but  I  can  assert  with  certainty,  that  if  the  whole  fragment  be  not  a  counterfeit, 
it  has  been  touched  and  truly  ruined  by  other  hands  than  those  of  time. 

From  the  priory  we  continued  our  journey  towards  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  along 
a  pleasant  coast,  rising  above  the  sea  in  gentle  hills,  richly  cultivated,  and  frequently 
jutting  out  in  picturesque  headlands,  thickly  tufted  with  wood.  A  few  years  ago  this  part 
of  the  country  was  entirely  bare  of  wood ;  but  a  very  general  attention  has  been  lately 
shewn  to  planting,  and  we  now  see  in  sheltered  places  trees  approaching  to  the  dignity 
of  timber;  and  even  where  completely  exposed  to  the  sea,  they  have  attained  sufficient 
growth  to  give  great  beauty  to  the  banks,  and  bays,  and  promontories  that  diversify  the 

shore. 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GKJEAT    BJtUTAlJN.  131 

shore.  Passing  through  the  pretty  hamlets  of  Bardsey  and  Baycliff,  we  descended  down 
to  Aldingham  Hall,  the  seat  of  Mr.  Baldwin,  who,  on  an  accidental  meeting,  received 
us  with  great  friendliness,  and  entertained  us  with  the  hospitality  of  his  house,  though 
perfect  strangers  to  him,  with  no  other  recommendation  than  our  vagrancy.  This  gen- 
tleman's house  composes,  with  the  rector}'  and  a  small  ancient  church,  a  pretty  group  of 
buildings,  pleasantly  situated  on  a  green  turf  close  to  the  sea,  and  shaded  by  trees 
which  we  thought  quite  stately.  Aldingham  is  the  boundary  of  all  beautiful  and  pic- 
turesque scenery  on  this  coast  of  the  bay:  further  south_the  country  becomes  tame,  naked, 
and  dreary,  gradually  declining  in  height,  and  shewing,  in  the  brown  and  tarnished  colour 
of  its  vegetation,  the  effects  of  its  exposure  to  the  great  western  sea.  The  southern  and 
south-western  fronts  of  Low  Furness  are  protected  from  the  rage  of  the  sea,  as  far  as  it 
can  affect  the  substance  of  the  land,  by  Walney  Island,  which  lies  along  them  in  the  form 
of  a  bow,  separated  by  a  channel,  varying  from  a  mile  to  two  miles  in  breadth. 

We  procured  a  night's  lodging  at  Rampside,  a  humble  bathing  place;  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning  hired  a  boat  in  order  to  visit  Walney,  and  a  cluster  of  very  small  islands, 
four  or  five  in  number,  lying  at  its  south  end  between  it  and  the  main.  These  are  all 
very  low ;  and  one  of  them,  Foulney  Isle,  so  remarkably  so,  that,  as  we  saw  it  from  the 
shore  at  high  water,  the  cattle  feeding  upon  it  looked  as  if  afloat  on  a  raft.  They  are  all 
girded  round  by  banks  of  beach,  which  have  alone  prevented  their  being  swallowed  up 
long  since.  The  sea  retires  from  them  all  at  low  water,  excepting  Peel  Island,  which,  on 
account  of  the  remains  of  its  ancient  castle,  was  the  only  one  that  we  thought  it  worth 
while  to  land  upon.  This  island,  which  is  distant  somewhat  less  than  a  mile  from  the 
main  coast,  contains  eleven  acres  of  land,  all  covered  with  a  good  depth  of  soil,  which 
produces  barley  and  oats.  There  is  a  considerable  depth  of  water  in  the  channel  all 
round  it  at  all  times  of  tide,  and  on  its  south  side  is  a  safe  roadstead,  and  one  of  great 
importance  to  vessels  bound  to  the  northward,  as  it  is  the  only  one  between  it  and 
Whitehaven. 

A  castle  was  built  here  by  an  abbot  of  Furness,  probably  as  a  place  of  shelter  for  the 
brotherhood,  and  the  wealth  of  the  abbey,  in  case  of  any  attack  upon  it ;  and  great  art  and 
labour  was  employed  in  order  to  render  it  a  secure  one.  The  situation  is  naturally  weak, 
but  this  imperfection  was  provided  against  by  the  strength  of  the  outworks.  Two  sides  of 
the  castle  stand  at  the  edge  of  a  steep  bank,  immediately  above  the  sea ;  and  the  sides 
towards  the  land  are  defended  by  two  walls  of  great  thickness,  each  flanked  with  square 
towers  and  surrounded  by  a  ditch.  In  the  space  between  the  outer  and  inner  wall,  or,  to 
speak  classically,  within  the  outer  ballium,  was  a  small  chapel,  now  only  to  be  traced  in 
its  foundations.  The  walls  are  tolerably  preserved,  but  several  of  their  towers  are  entirely 
destroyed.  The  body  of  the  castle  is  a  square,  strengthened  with  immense  buttresses  at  the 
corners,  and  one  in  the  centre  of  each  front.  There  is  only  one  entrance  into  it,  leading 
through  an  arch-way  which  projects  from  one  front,  and  was  guarded  by  portcullises.  The 

s  2  interior 


132  VOYAGE    KOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

interior  is  divided  by  two  partition  walls  into  three  oblong  compartments,  the  central  one  of 
which  contained  the  state  rooms.  The  whole  is  now  a  complete  ruin ;  but  one  may  still 
see  that  while  every  art  was  applied  to  strengthen  the  building,  care  was  taken  to  give  it 
as  much  elegance  as  possible.  The  walls,  which  are  nine  feet  thick,  are  built  with  stones  from 
the  beach,  of  all  sizes  and  colours,  and  have  rather  a  rude  appearance ;  but  the  windows, 
doorways,  and  all  the  ornamental  parts  of  the  interior,  are  finished  with  red  freestone.  A  vast 
breach  has  been  made  in  the  walls  on  the  east  side  by  the  sea,  and  the  whole  of  this  front  seems 
to  hang  in  a  very  critical  posture,  and  to  be  ill  able  to  resist  the  enemy  which  has  already 
so  roughly  invaded  it ;  but  it  has  been  in  the  same  condition  for  nearly  a  century,  having 
been  protected  since  the  first  ruinous  assault  by  a  prodigious  accumulation  of  beach,  which 
has  been  thrown  up  at  the  south  end  of  Walney,  and  which,  running  to  the  eastward,  forms 
a  counterscarp  to  Peel  Island  against  the  force  of  the  southern  sea. 

There  is  a  public-house  on  the  island,  the  only  habitation,  tenanted  by  an  old 
Scotchman,  who  has  been  lord  of  this  domain  for  many  years,  and  goes  through  the 
duties  of  guide  and  expositor  among  the  ruins  of  the  castle  with  admirable  fluency.  Th« 
custom  of  the  seamen  from  the  roadstead,  and  the  donations  of  occasional  visitors  in  the 
summer  time,  support  him  in  a  state  of  which  he  has  no  right,  he  thinks,  to  complain;  but 
he  acknowledged  that  when  there  were  no  vessels  in  the  roadstead  he  found  his  situation 
rather  too  lonesome,  and  apt  to  drive  him  to  his  beer-barrel  for  company. 

We  sailed  over  from  Peel  to  Walney,  a  distance  of  about  a  mile  and  a  half.  On  the 
passage  the  castle  was  seen  to  more  advantage  than  from  any  other  point  of  view ;  rising 
with  some  majesty  from  the  sea,  and  set  off  by  a  magnificent  back-ground  of  mountains. 
On  landing  at  Walney,  it  appeared  to  be  mournfully  barren  of  materials  for  the  considera- 
tion of  either  my  friend  or  myself.  There  is  a  light-house  upon  it  at  the  south  end,  as  a 
guide  for  vessels  to  Peel  roadstead ;  and  from  the  top  of  the  tower  we  had  a  complete  view 
over  the  whole  island,  which  discouraged  us  from  the  toil  of  walking  over  it,  and  disposed  us 
to  be  quite  content  with  such  an  account  of  it  as  we  could  collect  from  some  of  the  natives. 
It  is  about  ten  miles  long,  but  no  where  quite  a  mile  broad ;  a  perfect  flat,  without  a 
tree  or  a  live  bush  in  a  hedge  from  one  extremity  to  the  other.  It  grows  barley  and  oats, 
and  a  small  quantity  of  wheat;  but  a  great  proportion  of  it  is  poor  unproductive  land,  laid 
out  in  pasture.  Its  animals,  not  domestic,  are  a  few  hares  and  partridges,  a  plentiful  stock 
of  rabbits,  and  an  equally  multitudinous,  though  less  profitable,  body  of  rats.  There  are 
three  small  villages  on  it,  North  Scale,  near  the  north  end,  Bigger,  in  the  centre,  and  South 
End,  which,  though  on  the  utmost  verge  of  all  cultivation  or  vegetation  to  the  south,  is 
two  miles  from  the  south  end  of  the  island,  the  space  between  which  and  the  village  is 
filled  up  by  a  narrow  tract  of  barren  sands.  An  amazing  quantity  of  sand  has  been  col- 
lected at  each  extremity  of  the  island,  which,  stretching  out  from  each  towards  the  main 
land,  at  right  angles  to  the  general  coast  of  the  island,  gives  it  the  figure  of  a  bow.  At  the 
south  end  the  sand  terminates  in  a  bed  of  beach,  which  has  been  thrown  up,  like  a  vast  cir- 
cular 


VOYAGK    KOUJND    GKEAT    BRITAIN.  133 

cular  bastion,  at  least  a  mile  in  circumference.  Had  this  beach  been  distributed  along 
the  western  side  of  the  island,  it  would  have  been  invaluable ;  but  this  side  is  quite  de- 
fenceless, and  gradually  wasting  away  under  the  ceaseless  pressure  of  the  waves.  In  several 
places,  where  the  coast  is  particularly  low,  the  island  is  so  deeply  indented,  that,  with 
very  high  tides,  it  is  divided  by  the  sea  into  several  islands.  The  abbots  of  Furness 
charged  themselves  with  the  support  of  several  dykes,  for  the  defence  of  Walney;  but 
since  the  dissolution  it  has  been  taken  from  the  care  of  a  single  great  proprietor,  and 
indolently  yielded  up  to  the  ravages  of  the  sea,  which  is  now  in  a  fair  course  of  destroying 
it  altogether.  As  an  inducement  to  the  inhabitants  to  make  embankments,  there  is  a 
singular  provision  in  their  leases,  by  which  every  tenant  is  charged  with  the  lord's  rent  for 
the  whole  island ;  so  that  if  every  tenement,  excepting  one,  should  be  swallowed  up  by 
the  sea,  that  remaining  one  must  discharge  the  entire  rent*.  But  such  a  provision  as  this 
could  not  of  course  be  acted  upon,  for,  in  spite  of  every  precaution,  the  sea  might  prove 
irresistible ;  and  the  tenants  seem  to  be  aware  of  this,  and  determined  to  enjoy  their 
estates  quietly,  as  long  as  they  last,  without  troubling  themselves  about  the  sea,  or  the 
threats  of  their  leases. 

Among  the  curiosities  of  Walney,  Mr.  West  mentions  several  springs  of  fresh  water, 
at  North  Scale,  which  rise  and  fall  together  with  the  tides  of  the  sea.  "  The  deepest 
wells,"  he  observes  "  begin  to  gain  water  about  half-flood ;  but  those  which  perforate  the 
higher  part  of  the  stratum  are  then  empty,  and  do  not  receive  their  supply  until  about 
the  time  of  high  water,  and  during  the  first  part  of  the  ebb  tide;  for  the  fresh  water  will 
continue  to  accumulate  until  it  attains  the  level  of  the  salt  water  in  the  channel."  The 
wells  are  situated  close  by  the  side  of  Walney  Channel,  and  sunk  in  a  bed  of  sand ;  and 
Mr.  West  supposes  that  the  sea-water  is  deprived  of  its  saline  particles  by  being  strained 
through  the  sand.  I  can  give  no  more  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  matter;  but  I  con- 
ceive it  scarcely  possible  that  the  water  could  be  so  entirely  freed  from  salt  as  to  deserve 
the  name  of  fresh  water  by  so  rapid  a  process  of  filtration. 

On  our  return  to  the  mainland,  we  paid  a  visit  to  Furness  Abbey,  situated  in  a  glen 
darkened  with  wood,  whose  gloom  and  solitude  accord  well  with  the  solemn  grandeur  of 
this  venerable  ruin.  A  sudden  rain  prevented  our  seeing  the  place  to  advantage,  and 
drove  us  away  before  I  had  sufficiently  conned  and  studied  it  to  trust  myself  with  any 
account  of  it.  The  ruins  appear  to  be  in  much  the  same  state  as  when  seen  by  Mrs. 
Radcliffe ;  and  the  following  extract  from  her  description  will  far  more  than  atone  to  the 
reader  for  the  loss  of  any  description  by  myself.  "  The  windings  of  the  glen  conceal  these 
venerable  ruins  till  they  are  closely  approached ;  and  the  by-road  that  conducted  us  is 
margined  with  a  few  ancient  oaks,  which  stretch  their  broad  branches  entirely  across  it, 
and  are  fine  preparatory  objects  to  the  scene  beyond.  A  sudden  bend  in  this  road  brought 

*  West's  Antiquities  of  Furness. 

US 


134  VOYAGE    ROUND    GKEAT    BRITAIN. 

us  within  view  of  the  northern  gate  of  the  abbey,  a  beautiful  Gothic  arch,  one  side  of 
which  is  luxuriantly  festooned  with  nightshade.  A  thick  grove  of  plane-trees,  with  some 
oak  and  beech,  overshadow  it  on  the  right,  and  lead  the  eye  onward  to  the  ruins  of  the 
abbey,  seen  through  this  dark  arch  in  remote  perspective,  over  rough  but  verdant  ground. 
The  principal  features  are  the  great  northern  window, 'and  part  of  the  eastern  choir,  with 
glimpses  of  shattered  arches  and  stately  walls  beyond,  caught  between  the  gaping  casements. 
On  the  left,  the  bank  of  the  glen  is  broken  into  knolls,  capped  with  oaks,  which,  in  some 
places,  spread  downwards  to  a  stream  that  winds  round  the  ruin,  and  darken  it  with  their 
rich  foliage.  Through  this  gate  is  the  entrance  into  the  immediate  precincts  of  the  abbey, 
an  area  said  to  contain  sixty-five  acres,  now  called  the  Deer  Park.  It  is  inclosed  by  a 
stone  wall,  on  which  the  remains  of  many  small  buildings  still  appear,  such  as  the  porter's 
lodge,  mills,  granaries,  ovens,  and  kilns,  that  once  supplied  the  monastery;  some  of  which, 
seen  under  the  shade  of  the  fine  old  trees,  that  on  every  side  adorn  the  broken  steeps  of 
this  glen,  have  a  very  picturesque  effect. 

"  The  abbey,  which  was  formerly  of  such  magnitude  as  nearly  to  fill  up  the  breadth 
of  the  glen,  is  built  of  a  pale  red  stone,  dug  from  the  neighbouring  rocks,  now  changed, 
by  time  and  weather,  to  a  tint  of  dusky  brown,  which  accords  well  with  the  hues  of  plants 
and  shrubs  that  every  where  emboss  the  mouldering  arches.  The  finest  view  of  the  ruin 
is  on  the  east  side,  where,  beyond  the  vast  shattered  frame  that  once  contained  a  richly 
painted  window,  is  seen  a  perspective  of  the  choir  and  of  distant  arches,  remains  of  the 
nave  of  the  abbey,  closed  by  the  woods.  This  perspective  of  the  ruin  is  said  to  be  287 
feet  in  length ;  the  choir  part  of  it  is  in  width  only  38  feet  inside,  but  the  nave  is  70 :  the 
walls,  as  they  now  stand,  are  54  feet  high,  and  in  thickness  five.  Southward  from  the 
choir  extend  the  still  beautiful,  though  broken,  pillars  and  arcades  of  some  chapels,  now 
laid  open  to  the  day ;  the  chapter-house,  the  cloisters,  and  beyond  all,  and  detached  from 
all,  the  school-house,  a  large  building,  the  only  part  of  the  monastery  that  still  boasts  a 
roof. 

"  Of  a  quadrangular  court,  on  the  west  side  of  the  church,  334  feet  long,  and  102 
feet  wide,  little  vestige  now  appears,  except  the  foundation  of  a  range  of  cloisters,  that 
formed  its  western  boundary ;  and  under  the  shade  of  which  the  monks,  on  days  of  high 
solemnity,  passed  in  their  customary  procession  round  the  court.  What  was  the  belfry 
is  now  a  huge  mass  of  detached  ruin,  picturesque  from  the  loftiness  of  its  shattered  arches, 
and  the  high  inequalities  of  the  ground  within  them,  where  the  tower  that  once  crowned 
this  building  having  fallen,  lies  in  vast  fragments,  now  covered  with  earth  and  grass,  and 
no  longer  distinguishable  but  by  the  hillocks  they  form.  The  school-house,  a  heavy  struc- 
ture, attached  to  the  boundary-wall  on  the  south,  is  nearly  entire,  and  the  walls,  particu- 
larly of  the  portal,  are  of  enormous  thickness ;  but  here  and  there  a  chasm  discloses  the 
staircases,  that  wind  within  them  to  chambers  above. 

"  These  are  the  principal  features  that  remain  of  this  once  magnificent  abbey.    It 

was 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN".  135 

was  dedicated  to  St.  Mary,  and  received  a  colony  of  monks  from  the  monastery  of 
Savigny,  in  Normandy,  who  were  called  Grey  Monks,  from  their  dress  of  that  colour,  till 
they  became  Cistercians ;  and,  with  the  severe  rules  of  St.  Bernard,  adopted  a  white  habit, 
which  they  retained  till  the  dissolution  of  the  monastic  orders  in  England. 

"  The  deep  forests  that  once  surrounded  the  abbey,  and  overspread  all  Furness,  con- 
tributed, with  its  insulated  situation,  on  a  neck  of  land  running  out  into  the  sea,  to  secure 
it  from  the  depredations  of  the  Scots,  who  were  continually  committing  hostilities  on  the 
borders.  On  an  eminence  over  the  abbey  are  the  remains  of  a  beacon  or  watch-tower, 
raised  by  the  society  for  their  further  security.  It  commands  extensive  views  over  Low 
Furness,  and  the  bay  of  the  sea  immediately  beneath ;  looking  forward  to  the  town  and 
castle  of  Lancaster,  faintly  appearing  on  the  opposite  coast;  on  the  south,  to  the  isles  of 
Walney,  Foulney,  and  their  numerous  inlets,  on  one  of  which  stands  Peel  Castle;  and  on 
the  north  to  the  mountains  of  High  Furness  and  Coniston,  rising  in  a  grand  amphitheatre 
round  this  inlet  of  the  Irish  Channel. 

"  The  sum  total  of  all  rents  belonging  to  the  abbey,  immediately  before  the  dissolu- 
tion, was  £  946.  2s.  Wd.  collected  from  Lancashire,  Cumberland,  and  even  from  the  Isle 
of  Man  ;  a  sum  which,  considering  the  value  of  money  at  that  period,  and  the  woods, 
meadows,  pastures,  and  fisheries,  retained  by  the  society  in  their  own  hands — the  quantity 
of  provisions  for  domestic  use,  brought  by  the  tenants  instead  of  rent,  and  the  shares  of 
mines,  mills,  and  salt-works,  which  belonged  to  the  abbey — swells  its  former  riches  to  an 
enormous  amount." 

On  the  return  of  fine  weather  we  resumed  our  journey,  going  through  a  very  unin~ 
teresting  day's  work,  for  which  few  words  will  suffice.  Our  course  lay  along  the  sound 
of  Walney,  from  which  the  sea  had  retired,  leaving  it  a  plain  of  mud.  The  main  coast, 
with  Walney  and  Peel,  and  the  neighbouring  islands,  seemed  to  inclose  it  in  a  complete 
circle,  apparently  without  any  outlet ;  and  their  barren  sands,  and  flat,  naked  and  exposed 
fields,  composed,  with  this  bason  of  mud,  a  most  dull  and  dismal  prospect.  After  a  walk 
of  about  half  a  dozen  miles,  with  no  variation  in  this  disagreeable  scenery,  it  was  rendered 
more  particularly  cheerless  by  the  return  of  a  heavy  rain,  which  quickened  our  speed,  and 
soon  pelted  us  on  to  the  village  of  Barrow.  Here  we  found  a  well-provided  public-house, 
but  unluckily  pre-occupied  by  a  gang  of  reapers,  who  having  continued  at  their  work,  in 
hopes  of  fairer  weather,  till  they  were  soaked  to  the  skin,  were  now  providing  against  all 
dangerous  consequences,  by  unlimited  draughts  of  ale.  We  were  aware  that  there  would 
be  no  peace  for  us  as  long  as  they  were  able  to  swallow  ;  and  accordingly  our  ears  were 
outraged  for  several  hours  by  a  merciless  bout  of  singing  and  squabbling,  till  the  landlord 
interfered,  and  smoothing  the  sternness  of  his  purpose  with  a  smiling  countenance,  fairly 
turned  all  his  guests  out  of  doors,  saving  two  or  three,  who  were  utterly  helpless  and  im- 
moveable,  and  had  quietly  betaken  themselves  to  their  night's  lodging  under  the  table. 
These  were  "  fellows  fierce  from  Furness  Fells ;"  and  rare  chaps  they  are,  observed  the 

landlord ; 


136  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

landlord ;  meaning  to  signify  that  a  more  riotous,  ranting,  fighting,  drinking  race,  are  not 
to  be  met  with.  They  have  some  qualities  of  a  more  valuable  nature ;  and  if  there  be 
truth  in  our  reporter,  the  landlord,  who  was  a  Lancashire  man  himself,  will  cover  more 
ground  in  a  game  at  foot-ball  than  twice  the  number  of  men  from  any  other  county  in  the 
kingdom.  This  they  will  do  when  at  play ;  but  they  signalize  themselves  equally  when 
at  serious  work,  and  will  cut  down  a  field  of  wheat  with  matchless  rapidity. 

Opposite  to  the  village,  and  a  few  hundred  yards  from  it,  lies  Old  Barrow,  a  small 
island,  about  a  mile  and  a  quarter  long,  and  half  a  mile  broad.  It  is  of  the  same  appear- 
ance as  Walney,  and  both  were  no  doubt  formerly  connected  in  one  plain  with  the  main- 
land. The  substratum  of  them  both  is  a  peat-moss ;  and  the  same  substance  is  found  in 
the  sound  by  digging  to  a  little  depth  below  the  sand.  There  is  water  enough  at  high  tide 
in  the  channel,  between  Old  Barrow  and  the  mainland,  for  vessels  of  considerable  burthen ; 
and  several  come  hither  regularly  for  iron-ore,  which  is  procured  from  mines  near  Ulver- 
ston,  and  exported  in  large  quantities  to  Hull,  Chepstow,  Neath,  and  Cardiff. 

The  coast  extending  northwards,  from  Barrow  to  the  mouth  of  the  Dudden,  being 
flat,  sandy,  and  totally  without  interest,  we  proceeded  by  an  inland  road  to  Dalton, 
passing  through  a  country  consisting  of  high  round  hills,  covered  with  heavy  crops  of 
wheat  and  barley.  On  our  arrival  at  Dalton,  we  found  the  place  full  of  bustle  and  noise, 
in  consequence  of  an  influx  of  strangers  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  who  had  come  to 
seek  employment  as  reapers,  and  were  clamorously  demanding  the  attention  of  some 
farmers,  who  had  assembled  at  the  inn-door,  to  pick  their  men,  and  adjust  the  conditions 
of  their  labour.  Our  commiseration  was  excited  for  half  a  dozen  poor  Irishmen,  who 
stood  aloof  from  the  throng,  like  outcasts,  and  were  as  miserable  in  their  looks,  and  abject 
and  filthy  in  their  whole  appearance,  as  the  vilest  description  of  beggars.  These  poor 
fellows  had  slept  in  a  cow-house  all  night,  for  they  were  so  covered  with  dirt,  that  none 
of  the  publicans  in  the  place  would  give  them  beds.  One  of  them,  too,  assured  me  that 
he  had  tasted  nothing  but  bread  and  water  during  the  last  twenty-four  hours,  though* 
during  that  time,  he  had  walked  more  than  forty  miles.  What  must  these  wretched 
creatures  suffer  in  their  own  country,  when  they  come,  by  way  of  benefit  to  themselves, 
to  be  so  treated  in  this  ?  They  leave  their  homes  very  sorrily  provided  for  their  journey, 
and  make  their  way  by  a  variety  of  expedients,  which  procure  for  them  no  good  name  in 
the  country ;  but  which,  in  consideration  of  their  extreme  penury,  one  should  regard  with 
all  possible  lenity.  Standing  by  the  sturdy  peasants  of  this  county,  they  were  seen  to 
the  greatest  disadvantage ;  but,  in  spite  of  their  wretched  appearance,  they  are  capable 
of  undergoing  great  fatigue,  and  can  stand  their  ground  with  the  toughest  and  strongest 
labourers  of  the  field.  Had  the  farmers  here  had  time  to  attend  to  them,  they  might, 
perhaps,  have  employed  these  forlorn  creatures;  but  their  attention  was  completely 
engrossed  by  the  loud  applications  of  bolder  pretenders ;  and  when  they  had  selected  as 
many  men  as  they  required,  we  saw  the  poor  Irishmen  walk  despondingly  away,  amidst 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  137 

the  sneers  of  the  crowd,  and  many  a  paltry  joke  on  the  raggedness  and  filthiness  of  their 
attire. 

Dalton  is  a  small  neat  town,  delightfully  situated  on  a  hill  rising  above  a  valley  of 
extreme  fertility.  This  place  was  formerly  considered  the  capital  of  Furness,  and  drove 
a  trade  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  its  rank ;  but  on  the  dissolution  of  the  great  Abbey, 
Ulverston,  as  a  more  convenient  station,  became  the  general  mart  of  the  district,  and 
Dalton  sunk  into  insignificance.  A  castle  was  built  here  by  the  Abbots  of  Furness,  as  a 
check  to  the  depredations  of  the  Scottish  borderers  :  a  large  square  tower  of  it  still  remains, 
which  is  now  appropriated  to  the  courts-leet  and  baron  of  the  Duke  of  Buccleugh  and 
Lord  Beaulieu,  who  are  the  chief  lords  of  the  liberty  and  manor  of  Furness.  It  was  the 
fame  of  this  castle  that  had  drawn  us,  somewhat  out  of  our  way,  and  beyond  the  line  of 
our  duty,  to  Dalton,  but  we  had  the  mortification  to  find  that  there  was  nothing  about  it 
to  reward  us  for  our  aberration. 

Returning  to  the  coast,  we  proceeded  along  the  eastern  shore  of  the  estuary  of  the 
Duddon,  which,  like  all  the  inlets  on  the  coast,  is  left  a  plain  of  sand  at  low  water,  except 
in  the  narrow  channel  of  the  river.  The  scenery  round  it  is  grand  and  romantic  in  the 
highest  degree.  The  estuary  at  its  mouth  is  nearly  four  miles  broad,  but  gradually  con- 
tracts inwards,  the  hills  on  each  side  converging  till  they  mingle  together  at  the  head  of 
the  inlet,  the  Coniston  Fells  to  the  right,  and  the  mountains  of  Cumberland  to  the  left, 
composing  a  most  picturesque  and  magnificent  group.  On  its  eastern  side  the  inlet  is 
bounded  by  a  long  and  somewhat  uniform  line  of  hills,  cultivated  to  their  summits  towards 
the  mouth,  but  more  rude  and  barren  higher  up,  though  valuable  from  the  fine  slates 
which  are  procured  on  them,  and  which  form  the  principal  articles  of  trade  exported  from 
the  Duddon.  On  the  western  side  appears  the  dark  and  tremendous  front  of  Black- 
coomb,  rising  majestically  behind  a  lesser  range  of  broken  and  unequal  hills,  which  stretch 
along  the  shore  in  a  waving  and  indented  line,  and  compose  a  varied  and  pleasing  fore- 
ground to  the  landscape,  in  parts  rough  and  rude,  but  interspersed  with  meadows  and 
fields  of  corn,  in  knolls,  and  banks,  and  glens,  and  along  the  whole  line  abundantly  covered 
with  coppice-wood.  We  arrived  too  late  to  cross  the  ford  with  safety,  and  there  being  no 
ferry,  and  not  being  able  to  procure  any  kind  of  boat,  we  were  obliged  to  proceed  round 
the  head  of  the  estuary,  which  we  found  rather  an  irksome  task,  as  we  had  already  had  an 
advantageous  view  from  its  mouth  of  all  that  it  had  to  present  to  our  observation.  The 
sands  are  bounded  at  their  head  by  a  marsh,  the  remnant  probably  of  a  plain  which  once 
occupied  the  whole  space  now  filled  up  by  the  estuary.  With  neap  tides  the  sea  never 
covers  more  than  half  the  surface  of  the  sands,  and  it  appears  practicable  to  block  it  out 
altogether  by  an  embankment  from  an  extensive  tract  at  the  upper  part  of  them ;  but  the 
expense  of  such  a  work,  and  the  laborious  process  that  it  would  require  to  bring  the  land 
into  cultivation,  are  reasonable  discouragements  against  the  experiment.  At  the  marsh 

VOL.  11.  T  the 


138  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  Duddon  ceases  to  have  any  communication  with  the  tide,  and  about  a  mile  higher 
up  it  is  crossed  by  a  bridge  of  three  arches,  where  the  whole  scenery  assumes  an  entirely 
new  character ;  the  dull  expanse  of  swamp  and  sand  contracting  into  a  narrow  valley, 
teeming  with  vegetation,  through  which  the  river  winds  in  a  shallow  clear  stream,  spark- 
ling over  a  pebbly  bottom.  To  the  right  the  valley  is  bounded  by  a  round  hill  covered 
with  pasture  and  corn,  on  the  opposite  side  by  more  rugged  steeps,  but  clothed  with  cop- 
pice-wood, and  about  a  mile  above  the  bridge  it  is  lost  amongst  the  closing  mountains. 

We  passed  a  night  at  the  small  town  of  Broughton,  which,  not  standing  within  the 
limits  of  our  lawful  route,  had  no  claims  upon  our  attention  beyond  the  accommodations 
that  it  afforded  us.  On  resuming  our  journey  we  crossed  the  Duddon,  and  entered  the 
county  of  Cumberland.  We  were  struck  with  the  strong  contrast  of  the  prospects 
above  and  below  the  bridge.  Above  appeared  the  confined  vale  of  Duddon,  hemmed  in 
and  darkened  by  a  skreen  of  mountains,  and  below  opened  a  wide  expanse  of  sands  and 
sea,  melting  into  a  flat  unbroken  horizon,  and  under  the  glare  of  one  broad  and  equal 
light.  As  we  proceeded  towards  the  mouth  of  the  estuary,  many  picturesque  and  romantic 
spots  of  scenery  broke  upon  our  view,  among  the  wild  hills  that  skirt  the  western  shore, 
most  of  them  clothed  with  coppice-wood,  with  here  and  there  some  cultivated  fields  and 
a  few  scattered  cottages  and  farms.  The  huge,  dark,  barren  front  of  Blackcoomb  was 
seen  occasionally  soaring  above  these  lesser  heights  with  great  majesty.  We  passed 
through  the  small  villages  of  Lady  Hall  and  Dunning  Well,  which  may  be  mentioned  at 
least  for  the  dignity  of  sound  that  they  give  to  our  route ;  and  after  a  walk  of  about  six 
miles,  stopped  at  Millum  Castle,  anciently  the  great  citadel  of  this  part  of  the  country, 
but  now  transformed  into  an  humble  farm-house.  The  lordship  of  Millum  was  of  great 
extent,  reaching  more  than  ten  miles  in  length,  from  the  Duddon  to  the  Esk,  and  six 
miles  in  breadth,  from  the  sea  up  to  the  mountains.  It  pertained  originally  to  the  barony 
of  Egremont,  but  was  granted  by  William  Meschines,  Lord  of  Egremont,  in  the  time  of 
Henry  the  First,  to  the  Boyvills,  from  whom,  after  long  possession,  it  passed  by  marriage 
to  the  Huddlestons,  and  continued  in  that  family  till  purchased  by  its  present  proprietor, 
Lord  Lonsdale. 

The  castle  is  small,  consisting  of  only  a  single  square  tower  with  turrets  at  the  angles, 
which  was  formerly  surrounded  by  a  wall  and  fosse  There  is  nothing  about  it  to  interest 
an  observer,  except  an  appearance  of  antiquity,  and  the  effect  of  this  is  not  a  little  im- 
paired by  the  vulgar  uses  to  which  it  is  now  subjected.  It  is  surrounded  by  an  extensive 
park,  a  tract  of  rough  and  rugged  ground,  once  covered  with  a  grove  of  huge  oaks,  and 
well  stocked  with  deer,  but  now  a  naked  waste.  The  whole  domain  was  stripped  of  its 
woods  by  one  of  the  Huddlestons,  for  the  sake  of  opening  some  mines  of  iron-ore,  and 
building  a  large  vessel,  both  of  which  projects  proved  abortive.  There  are  still,  however, 
a  few  fine  trees  about  the  castle,  whose  shade  gives  solemnity  to  its  mouldering  walls. 

Adjoining 


VOVAOE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  139 

Adjoining  is  an  old  church,  grey  and  weather-beaten;  and  these  venerable  buildings,  with 
the  dark  foliage  of  the  trees,  and  a  wild  and  solitary  country  around  them,  compose  an 
interesting  landscape. 

On  leaving  the  castle  we  had  a  journey  before  us  of  some  leagues,  which  made  but 
few  demands  on  our  pencils  and  common-place  books.  To  the  northward  of  the  Duddon, 
a  dull  naked  flat,  several  miles  in  breadth,  lies  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea,  bordered 
along  the  shore  by  sand-hills,  or  a  low  marl-bank.  The  sand-hills  are  a  firm  bulwark 
against  the  sea,  but  are  frequently  broken  up  by  the  western  gales  and  scattered  over  the 
land  ;  and  the  marl-bank,  though  itself  innocent  of  any  mischief  towards  the  land,  cannot 
secure  it  against  the  depredations  of  the  sea.  We  passed  close  under  the  foot  of  Black- 
coomb,  and  for  the  sake  of  relieving  the  flatness  of  our  journey,  both  physical  and  moral, 
ascended  to  its  summit,  where  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  we  were  on  a 
station  from  whence,  on  a  clearer  day,  we  might  have  commanded  a  most  extensive 
prospect.  This  mountain  may  be  distinguished  from  the  south-east,  over  the  low  coasts 
of  Cheshire  and  Lancashire,  at  a  distance  of  nearly  a  hundred  miles,  and  from  its  summit 
may  be  seen  the  mountains  of  North  Wales,  the  Isle  of  Man,  seven  counties  of  England, 
and  as  many  of  Scotland.  A  hazy  atmosphere  prevented  our  seeing  quite  so  far,  but  we 
had  still  a  noble  prospect,  comprehending  the  mountains  of  the  lakes  in  all  their  rudeness 
and  savage  grandeur;  the  great  western  sea,  and  a  beautifully  varied  scene  along  the  broken 
coast  of  Lancashire.  On  the  summit  of  Blackcoomb  there  is  a  deep  and  spacious  cavity, 
which  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  crater  of  a  volcano,  though  it  now  gives  birth  to  an 
element  quite  opposite  and  hostile  to  all  combustible  matter,  a  small  rivulet  which  springs 
from  its  bottom.  Fragments  of  vitrified  matter,  it  is  said,  are  found  on  its  margin,  but 
we  either  did  not  see  any,  or  saw  them  with  ignorant  eyes. 

On  descending  down  to  the  flat,  we  proceeded  for  some  time  without  any  subject  for 
remark ;  but  as  our  way,  though  dull,  was  not  difficult,  we  soon  arrived  at  Bootle,  which, 
with  little  else  worth  our  consideration,  had  the  recommendation  of  a  tolerable  inn.  The 
town  stands  about  two  miles  from  the  sea,  and  is  sheltered  by  a  few  trees,  which  the  skill 
and  resolution  of  the  inhabitants  have  raised  about  it  in  defiance  of  the  western  wind. 
I  know  not  really  that  I  have  any  thing  more  important  to  relate  concerning  the  place. 

A  traveller  careful  to  be  here  at  low  water  of  a  spring  tide  might  proceed  to  a  small 
bay  directly  west  of  this  town,  called  Selker  Bay,  where,  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile 
from  the  shore,  he  might  see,  as  the  natives  protest  they  have  often  seen,  some  fragments 
of  black  wood,  which  a  very  venerable  tradition  declares  to  be  the  remains  of  several 
gallies  sunk  there  on  some  great  invasion  of  this  island  by  the  Romans.  The  fact  is 
thought  to  be  countenanced  in  some  degree  by  the  appearance  of  some  Roman  works  on 
the  neighbouring;  coast.  On  the  common  of  Esk  Meals,  it  is  said,  there  are  the  traces  of 
an  encampment,  about  which  various  coins  and  broken  altars,  with  scraps  of  inscriptions, 
Lave  been  found.  A  man  inclined  to  sift  the  reasonableness  of  the  tradition  might  think 

T  2  it 


140  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

it  improbable  that  these  fragments  of  wood  should  have  existed  and  been  visible  for  so 
long  a  period,  particularly  on  a  sandy  shore,  subject  to  continual  variations,  and  might 
deem  it  not  less  unlikely  that  they  should  have  retained  any  signs  by  which  they  can  be 
sworn  not  to  belong  to  a  wreck  of  a  much  more  recent  date.  But  for  my  own  part, 
as  I  happened  to  be  on  the  spot  when  the  state  of  the  tide  did  not  permit  me  to  see  the 
remains,  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  plague  myself  or  my  readers  with  any  doubts  on 
the  subject. 

From  the  appearance  of  the  shore  about  Selker  Bay,  the  sea  seems  to  have  gained 
considerably  upon  the  land  of  late  years,  so  much  so  indeed  that  it  may  be  questioned 
whether  there  was  water  for  the  Roman  gallies,  at  the  time  of  the  invasion,  on  the  spot 
where  the  remains  of  them  are  said  now  to  be  seen.  The  bay  is  bounded  all  round  by  a 
low  bank  of  earth,  crammed  full  of  smooth  and  rounded  pebbles,  evidently  a  deposit  of 
the  sea,  which  now,  completing  one  more  in  a  series  of  revolutions,  is  marching  on  to 
recover  its  former  dominion.  To  the  northward  of  this  bay  commence  the  Esk  Meals,  a 
desolate  tract  of  sand-hills,  where  we  had  not  the  good  fortune  to  stumble  upon  the 
Roman  encampment.  Deliberately  to  search  for  such  a  thing  amidst  this  sea  of  hillocks, 
never  occurred  to  our  thoughts  as  a  matter  either  of  duty  or  amusement.  There  was 
nothing  of  natural  scenery  on  the  coast  to  gratify  attention,  but  when  we  had  advanced  a 
mile  or  two  to  the  northward  of  Bootle,  the  mountains  burst  upon  our  view  in  the  east, 
in  a  more  grand,  various,  and  multiplied  range  than  we  had  hitherto  seen,  at  the  distance 
of  three,  five,  and  fifteen  miles  from  the  sea.  In  the  distance  to  the  north  appeared  the 
great  promontory  of  St.  Bees,  and  to  the  west  the  Isle  of  Man  rose  majestically  from  the 
ocean,  marked  in  the  centre  by  three  spiring  mountains. 

At  the  north  end  of  the  Esk  Meals  there  is  an  opening  in  the  sand-hills  about  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  broad,  through  which  three  small  rivers,  the  Esk,  the  Mite,  and  the  Irt,  discharge 
themselves  in  one  stream  into  the  sea.  At  high  water  the  sea  on  its  confluence  with  these 
rivers  spreads  over  a  wide  space  within  the  sand-hills,  which  on  the  retiring  of  the  tide  is 
left,  except  in  the  channels  of  the  rivers,  a  dreary  extent  of  sand,  mud,  and  marsh.  On 
the  border  of  this  dismal  waste  stands  Ravenglass,  a  dirty,  ragged,  forlorn  looking  town, 
which,  considered  in  all  its  relations,  in  its  own  wretchedness,  and  the  dreariness  of  its 
situation,  may  be  pronounced  perhaps  to  be  the  most  miserable  place,  with  the  title  of  a 
town,  in  the  kingdom.  There  is  no  trade  of  any  kind  in  it,  the  people  picking  up  a  scanty 
subsistence  by  fishing,  which  in  the  summer  season  they  help  out  by  labouring  at  the 
harvest.  We  had  seen  and  were  to  see  nothing  so  mournfully  bad  as  Ravenglass,  but  we 
observed  in  few  of  the  small  towns  and  villages  of  Cumberland  that  appearance  of  com- 
fort, neatness,  and  comeliness,  which  distinguishes  those  in  the  adjoining  county  of  Lan- 
caster. The  people  of  this  county  not  having  the  benefit  of  the  manufactures  that  enrich 
the  inhabitants  of  Lancashire,  are  necessarily  poorer,  though  it  is  not  absolute  poverty  that 
will  account  for  the  signs  of  wretchedness  and  barbarism  which  deform  their  habitations 

and 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  141 

and  their  domestic  habits.  I  remember  going  up  to  a  clergyman  of  a  considerable  parish 
to  condole  with  him  on  the  poverty-stricken  condition  of  his  flock,  when  he  stopped  me 
to  say  that  I  might  spare  my  commiseration,  as  there  was  not  one  of  them  who  was  not 
as  well  provided  for  as  he  desired.  He  admitted  that  I,  as  a  stranger,  might  be  excused 
for  judging  otherwise,  but  attributed  those  external  marks  of  want  and  suffering  that  had 
influenced  my  opinion  to  another  cause  than  that  of  necessity.  There  being  no  great 
sources  of  wealth  in  the  county  to  tempt  the  greediness  of  adventurers  from  other  parts  of 
the  kingdom,  the  natives  are  not  disturbed  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  peculiar  usages  by 
the  interference  of  strangers,  and  cling  to  many  antiquated  forms  which  a  more  enlarged 
communication  with  society  might  have  taught  them  to  despise.  If  we  refer  back  to  man 
when  he  first  betook  himself  to  the  shelter  of  a  house,  we  shall  find  him  a  somewhat  dirty 
animal,  with  no  instinctive  relish  for  mops  and  brooms;  and  the  natives  of  Cumberland, 
having  profited  little  by  the  general  discoveries  of  the  world,  bear  a  nearer  resemblance 
in  their  domestic  system  to  the  aboriginal  householders,  by  it  is  not  worth  while  to  com- 
pute how  many  centuries,  than  the  people  of  Lancashire.  They  live  quietly  among 
themselves,  keeping  one  another  in  countenance,  by  an  equal  observance  of  the  same 
common  fashions,  with  no  intruders  to  shame  them  into  changes  by  better  examples. 
But  if  their  confined  knowledge  of  the  world  shuts  them  out  from  some  advantages,  it  de- 
fends them  too  against  many  evils.  Together  with  some  coarseness,  they  retain  a  great 
moral  simplicity,  which  keeps  their  passions  in  order,  and  would  be  ill  exchanged  for  a 
little  more  refinement  in  the  economy  of  their  homes.  They  have  not  been  taught  that 
cleanliness  is  a  virtue  worth  an  hour's  toil  in  the  day,  and  they  are  happily  ignorant  that 
they  want  more  money  than  they  have,  in  order  to  indulge  in  a  profligate  waste  of  their 
time,  their  health,  and  their  morals  at  the  ale-house. 

When  the  tide  is  in,  Ravenglass  is  not  very  easily  to  be  approached  from  the  sea 
side.  A  cart  which  we  had  the  luck  to  meet  transported  us  over  the  Esk  on  our  entrance 
into  the  town,  but  we  had  to  cross  the  Mite  and  the  Irt  before  we  could  pursue  our 
journey  along  the  coast,  and  had  to  wait  for  some  hours  before  they  became  fordable.  It 
may  illustrate  my  remarks  on  the  backwardness  of  these  people  in  the  common  arts  of 
life,  when  I  relate  that  there  has  been  a  town  here  for  some  centuries,  and  that  no  great 
discoverer  has  yet  adverted  to  the  convenience  of  a  ferry-boat,  though  with  every  tide 
there  is  some  one  to  feel  the  want  of  it.  There  is  a  wooden  bridge  over  the  Mite,  designed 
by  a  native  engineer,  and  built  so  as  to  be  of  as  little  use  as  possible,  being  so  low  that  it 
is  passable  only  wheri  the  tide  is  out  and  the  river  fordable. 

We  had  long  since  arrived  at  the  philosophy  of  being  amused  with  the  little  obstacles 
that  we  met  with  in  the  course  of  our  journey ;  and  have  often  laughed  at  the  shifts  and 
machinations  to  which  we  have  seen  people  driven  in  compassing  for  us  the  most  simple 
and  practicable  accommodations.  We  have  seen  a  whole  house  thrown  into  confusion 
on  our  asking  for  a  tea-spoon,  and  have  sent  three  messengers  over  the  country  before  we 

could 


142  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

could  shave,  finally  going  through  the  operation  without  glass  or  soap — but  that  was  in 
Wales.  On  arriving  at  Ravenglass  we  had  proposed  to  the  inhabitants  to  procure  for  us 
a  couple  of  horses,  and  all  the  ingenuity  and  industry  of  the  town  were  put  in  requisition 
to  get  them  ready.  We  were  never  doomed  to  see  them  however,  though  entertained  from 
time  to  time  during  our  stay  with  a  series  of  reports  upon  their  modes  of  progress  towards 
us.  They  were  out  at  grass ;  a  boy  was  dispatched  after  them,  and  another  after  him, 
and  a  third  after  both ;  they  had  strayed  into  a  distant  field,  but  after  prodigious  efforts 
were  caught  and  coming,  and  so  continued  for  some  hours,  when  the  Mite  became  ford- 
able,  and  we  were  content  to  think  no  more  about  them. 

From  the  little  bridge  on  the  Mite  we  had  a  sublime  view  of  the  mountains,  an  inner 
range  near  enough  for  us  to  make  out  every  crag  and  precipice,  and  every  variety  of 
colouring  on  its  broken  front;  and  four  vaster  mountains  in  the  distance,  rising  appa- 
rently from  distinct  bases,  with  tremendous  gulphs  between  them,  and  each  thrusting  its 
huge  summit  into  the  clouds.  The  inner  mountains,  amongst  which  we  particularly 
noticed  Wastdale  Head,  and  a  long  ridge  called  the  Screes,  are  remarkable  for  their  rugged- 
ness  and  their  barrenness,  exhibiting  nothing  but  vast  masses  of  naked  rock.  The  Screes, 
a  most  extraordinary  object,  is  thus  well  described  in  Espriellas's  *  Letters  from  England/ 
"  Imagine  the  whole  side  of  a  mountain,  a  league  in  length,  covered  with  loose  stones, 
white,  red,  blue,  and  green,  in  long  straight  lines  as  the  torrents  had  left  them,  in  sheets 
and  in  patches,  sometimes  broken  by  large  fragments  of  rocks,  which  had  unaccountably 
stopped  in  their  descent,  and  by  parts  which,  being  too  precipitous  for  the  stones  to  rest 
on,  were  darkened  with  mosses, — and  every  variety  of  form  and  colour  was  reflected  by 
the  dark  water  at  its  foot ;  no  trees  or  bushes  upon  the  whole  mountain, — all  was  bare, 
but  more  variegated  by  this  wonderful  mixture  of  colouring  than  any  vegetation  could 
have  made  it." 

We  could  distinguish  the  strangely  chequered  aspect  of  this  mountain  from  the  sea 
shore,  and  we  saw  it  together  with  the  surrounding  mountains  under  some  very  fine  effects 
of  light  and  shadow.  It  was  a  gloomy  day,  the  sky  darkened  with  vast  voluminous 
clouds,  through  which  the  sun  broke  in  short  and  partial  gleams.  As  we  were  gazing  at 
the  mountains  a  heavy  shower  came  down,  while  the  sun  was  still  shining,  and  a  bright 
rainbow  appeared  suspended  before  the  Screes,  giving  an  effect  of  strange  and  magnificent 
confusion  to  one  of  the  wildest  and  most  fantastic  landscapes  that  can  be  conceived. 

With  these  grand  objects  constantly  in  view,  exhibited  under  ever-changing  appear- 
ances, we  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  the  dulness  of  our  way,  though  immediately  upon 
the  coast,  our  peculiar  province,  all  was  blank  and  uninteresting.  After  crossing  the 
Mite  and  the  Irt  our  course  lay  over  a  flat  common  bounded  by  a  line  of  sand-hills,  thrown 
up  to  the  height  of  thirty  or  forty  feet.  No  variation  occurred  in  these  matters,  till  after 
a  walk  of  five  or  six  miles  we  found  ourselves  checked  in  our  progress  by  a  small  river, 
the  Calder,  which  we  had  been  assured  by  those  who  wanted  us  to  wait  for  the  horses 

that 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  143 

that  we  should  not  be  able  to  cross  without  difficulty  and  perhaps  danger.  It  is  a  shallow, 
rapid  stream,  about  twenty  yards  broad,  shewing  in  a  rough  bottom  of  pebbles  the  sign  of 
its  mountain  origin.  In  the  winter,  when  swollen  by  rains,  it  might  not  be  passable;  but 
as  we  perceived  that  it  was  not  now  more  than  two  feet  deep,  we  did  not  imagine  that  a 
man  could  be  unwittingly  drowned  in  it,  and  therefore  boldly  waded  through  it.  From 
a  small  eminence  near  this  stream  we  first  caught  a  sight  of  Scotland,  the  high  round  hill 
of  Criffel,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Solway  Frith,  appearing  distinctly  at  the  distance  of  nearly 
fifty  miles. 

About  half  a  mile  north  of  the  Calder  we  were  again  brought  to  a  short  stand  by  the 
End,  a  broader  and  more  placid  stream,  which,  when  joined  by  the  tide,  furnishes  a  good 
harbour  at  its  mouth  for  small  vessels,  formerly  much  resorted  to  by  smugglers.  We 
forded  it  without  wetting  our  knees,  and  were  then  pronounced,  by  a  guide  who  had  been 
forced  upon  us,  to  be  out  of  all  danger,  for  the  remainder  of  the  day,  and  to  be  trusted, 
without  fear  of  consequences,  to  our  own  free  government.  For  some  distance  north  of 
its  mouth  the  End  runs  parallel  with  the  sea,  separated  from  it  only  b}'  a  line  of  sand- 
hills, and  flanked  on  the  land  side  by  a  precipitous  bank  of  earth,  which  appears  to  have 
been  formerly  the  boundary  of  the  sea,  the  sand  being  a  formation  of  recent  date.  By 
means  of  this  new  accumulation,  the  course  of  the  river  has  been  lengthened  and  a  singu- 
lar valle}r  formed,  through  which  it  flows  at  nearly  an  equal  elevation  with  the  sea,  and 
not  more  than  fifty  yards  distant  from  it.  We  walked  along  its  border  for  about  a  mile, 
when  an  opening  appeared  in  the  bank  to  our  right,  and  the  river  turning  to  the  east- 
Avard  bore  us  company  no  longer. 

To  the  northward  of  this  point  the  coast  assumes  a  new  and  more  pleasing  character, 
the  flat  giving  way  to  a  range  of  lofty  undulating  hills,  entirely  bare  of  wood,  but  all  in 
cultivation,  and  now  glowing  with  a  ripe  and  abundant  harvest  of  corn.  These  hills  fill 
up  the  whole  space  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea,  and  extend  to  the  northward  to 
within  fifteen  miles  of  the  border  of  the  county.  They  are  covered  with  a  deep  rich  soil, 
and  are  exceedingly  fertile,  presenting  little  of  picturesque  beauty,  but  cheering  the  sight 
with  an  appearance  of  fruitfulness  that  is  peculiarly  agreeable  when  contrasted  with  the 
barren  and  savage  mountains  that  tower  up  behind  them.  Along  the  shore  the  sand-hills 
gradually  decline  in  height  and  bulk  as  they  become  distant  from  the  rivers  from  whence 
they  have  received  their  supplies,  and  about  two  miles  north  of  the  End  disappear  alto- 
gether, and  the  sea  is  bounded  by  a  steep  bank  of  earth,  which  is  continued  to  the  north- 
ward, till  interrupted  by  the  rocky  promontory  of  St.  Bees.  This  bank,  like  that  bordering 
Selker  Bay,  is  full  of  pebbles  that  must  once  have  been  under  water,  and  a  deep  shelving 
bed  of  beach  lies  at  its  base,  spoils  no  doubt  gained  from  the  land  by  the  sea,  but  which 
now  act  as  a  barrier  against  its  further  advances. 

We  passed  through  Nether-town,  the  lowest  of  three  villages,  which,  by  way  of  dis- 
tinguishing their  relative  elevations,  have  all  received  the  name  of  town,  in  signal  contempt 

of 


144  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  their  size  and  condition.  We  heard  of  Middle-Town  and  Upper-Town  only  from  re- 
port, which  declared  them  to  be  very  like  Nether-Town,  and  this  as  we  witnessed  com- 
prehended a  cluster  of  huts  more  wretched  in  appearance  than  any  we  had  seen  out  of 
Wales.  We  met  with  no  other  subject  for  particular  remark  till  we  arrived  at  St.  Bees, 
lying  at  the  foot  of  a  broad  sloping  hill ;  a  village  in  the  ordinary  style  of  the  county, 
consisting  of  a  row  of  rough  and  uncouth  cottages,  with  a  barn  interposing  between  each, 
and  blocking  up  the  doors  and  the  whole  street  with  its  various  refuse.  In  former  times 
this  was  a  place  of  high  sanctity  and  repute,  and  it  still  retains  something  to  gratify  the 
curiosity  of  a  traveller  in  the  remains  of  a  line  old  abbey.  It  received  its  name  from 
St.  Bega,  an  Irish  lady  of  miraculous  powers,  who  called  down  snow  at  Mid-summer,  and 
received  as  her  reward  all  the  land  on  which  it  fell.  She  is  said  to  have  founded  a  small 
monastery  at  St.  Bees  about  the  year  650,  and  a  church  was  afterwards  erected  here  to 
her  memory,  formerly  called  Kirkby  Begock,  from  the  British  words,  as  it  pleases  anti- 
quarians, Beg  and  Og,  which  signify  little  and  young.  The  monastery  was  destroyed  by 
the  Danes,  but  was  restored  by  William  Meschines,  who  made  it  a  cell  to  the  abbey  of 
St.  Mary  at  York,  containing  a  prior  and  six  Benedictine  monks,  and  by  his  charter 
granted  to  God  and  St.  Mary  of  York,  St.  Bega,  and  the  monks  serving  God  there,  all 
the  woods  within  their  boundaries  and  every  thing  within  them,  excepting  hart  and  hind, 
boar  and  hawk  ;  and  all  liberties  within  their  bounds,  which  he  himself  had  in  Copland, 
as  well  on  land  as  water,  both  fresh  and  salt*.  These  grants  were  all  confirmed  by 
Ranulph  the  son  of  William  Meschines,  and  many  additions  made  to  them  by  him  and 
other  benefactors.  The  revenues  of  the  house  at  the  dissolution  amounted,  according  to 
Dugdale,  to  143/.  IJs.  2d.  per  annum.  In  the  reign  of  Edward  the  Sixth,  the  manor, 
rectory,  and  cell  of  St.  Bees,  were  granted  to  Sir  Thomas  Chaloner,  paying  to  the  crown 
a  rent  of  14S/.  16s.  2rf.  They  afterwards  came  into  the  possession  of  the  Wyberghs,  an 
ancient  family  of  this  place,  who  being  reduced  by  great  losses  in  the  turbulent  reign  of 
Charles  the  First  mortgaged  St.  Bees  to  the  Lowther  family :  in  the  year  1633  Sir  John 
Lowther  foreclosed  the  mortgage,  and  the  estate  is  still  in  the  possession  of  his  family. 

The  abbey  was  an  elegant  structure,  but  has  been  much  disfigured  by  modern  altera- 
tions, and  in  parts  is  falling  fast  to  ruin.  It  is  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  the  architecture  all 
Gothic  except  the  western  entrance,  which  consists  of  a  handsome  Saxon  arch,  with  three 
distinct  ribs  ornamented  with  zig-zag  mouldings,  and  each  springing  from  a  column  with 
a  highly  worked  capital.  The  columns  are  all  destroyed,  but  most  of  their  capitals  are 
preserved.  On  the  key-stone  of  the  arch  was  sculptured  a  head,  supposed  to  have  been 
that  of  Our  Saviour.  The  nave  of  the  church  is  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet  long,  but  all  its 
proportions  are  spoiled  by  a  partition  wall  of  late  erection  which  cuts  off  a  great  portion 
of  the  west  end,  and  by  a  new  roof  considerably  lower  than  the  original  one,  which  con- 

*  Nicholson's  History  of  Westmoreland  and  Cumberland. 

ceals 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  145 

ceals  the  terminations  of  the  fine  lofty  arches  supporting  the  tower.  The  tower  itself  has 
suffered  a  material  diminution  of  its  height,  rising  only  "a  few  yards  above  the  crowns  of 
the  arches.  The  chancel  is  roofless  and  a  mere  shell;  but  having  been  subject  to  no  al- 
terations or  additions,  it  is  the  most  interesting  part  of  the  building.  It  is  lighted  by  those 
long,  narrow,  sharp-pointed  windows,  that  were  introduced  into  Gothic  architecture  in  the 
time  of  Henry  the  Third.  In  the  east  wall  are  two  niches  with  rich  canopies,  supported 
by  small  round  columns:  they  were  placed  one  on  each  side  of  the  communion-table,  and 
were  designed,  I  imagine,  for  the  reception  of  statues.  All  the  ornamental  work  in  this 
part  of  the  building  is  sculptured  with  great  delicacy,  and  being  composed  of  a  very  fine 
grained  red  stone,  has  an  extremely  beautiful  appearance.  The  whole  church  is  built  of 
the  same  kind  of  stone,  which,  from  the  stains  of  the  weather  and  the  impression  of  time, 
has  assumed  a  tone  of  colouring  very  agreeable  in  itself,  and  giving  an  interesting  aspect 
of  age  to  the  building.  The  nave  and  every  thing  in  it,  from  the  ceiling  down  to  the 
pews,  are  daubed  over  with  whitewash,  an  abomination  extended  with  a  merciless  licence 
towards  almost  all  the  public  buildings  in  every  town  in  Cumberland. 

There  is  a  large  free-school  at  St.  Bees,  which  was  founded  and  endowed  by  Grindal, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  the  year  1583.  It  had  formerly  a  high  reputation  in  this 
part  of  the  country,  but  has  now  fallen  into  neglect,  and  is  frequented  principally  by  the 
sons  of  farmers.  The  gentlemen  of  the  county  are  unwilling,  as  I  was  informed,  to  send 
their  children  to  it,  from  a  horror  of  their  picking  up  the  provincial  dialect. 

On  returning  to  the  sea-shore  we  were  pleased  with  the  re-appearance  of  a  descrip- 
tion of  coast  that  we  had  been  strangers  to  since  we  quitted  North  Wales,  consisting  of 
tremendous  precipices  of  naked  rock.  About  half  a  mile  to  the  westward  of  the  abbey 
rises  the  south  end  of  St.  Bees'  Head.  This  promontory  is  formed  by  the  western  face  of 
a  huge  hill,  which  rises  to  the  height  of  about  five  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea, 
Sloping  down  with  a  steep  declivity  till  it  terminates  in  a  precipice,  varying  from  one 
hundred  and  fifty  to  two  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  projecting  into  the  sea  like  a  vast 
semicircular  bastion.  Its  whole  length  extends  rather  more  than  two  miles,  and  when 
seen  from  the  sea  it  has  a  very  magnificent  effect,  awing  the  mind  with  its  vastness,  and 
the  terrors  of  its  precipices,  and  the  signs  of  violence  and  ruin  impressed  upon  its  shattered 
front  by  the  battering  of  the  waves.  The  rock  of  which  it  is  composed  is  a  red  sand-stone, 
in  horizontal  strata  of  enormous  thickness,  and  intersected  at  irregular  intervals  by  thin 
layers  of  white  sand-stone.  In  places  the  red  face  of  the  cliff  is  thickly  marked  with 
stripes  of  this  white  stone,  and  has  a  curious  appearance,  not  unaptly  compared  by  our 
simple  guide  to  fat  and  lean  on  a  joint  of  beef.  The  rock  is  seamed  all  over  by  vertical 
fissures,  which,  with  the  horizontal  divisions  of  the  strata,  cut  it  into  square  blocks,  loosely 
held  together,  and  often  thrown  down  in  prodigious  heaps  as  the  sea  undermines  it  at  the 
base. 

This  promontory,  together  with  a  narrow  hilly  tract,  running  from  its  north  end  as 
VOL.  n.  v  far 


146  VOYAGE    ROUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

far  as  Whitehaven,  was  once  an  island,  which  is  mentioned  in  some  ancient  records  by 
the  title  of  Preston  Isle.  It  is  now  connected  with  the  mainland  by  a  narrow  valley,  one 
extremity  of  which  opens  into  the  sea  near  St.  Bees,  and  the  other  into  the  small  bay  of 
Whitehaven.  This  valley,  though  now  verdant  and  fruitful,  was,  without  doubt,  at  no 
very  remote  period  the  bed  of  the  sea.  The  surface  of  it  in  its  whole  length  is  uniformly 
flat  and  even,  and  the  soil  at  a  trifling  depth  composed  entirely  of  sand  and  shells.  A 
few  years  ago  an  anchor  was  dug  up  in  it  of  a  size  which  proves  that  the  channel  was 
navigable  for  vessels  of  considerable  burthen.  It  is  not  known  at  what  time  this  revolution 

O 

took  place,  but  it  must  have  been  prior  to  the  foundation  of  St.  Bees'  Abbey,  which  stands 
within  the  mouth  of  the  valley.  The  retreat  of  the  sea  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
aided  by  any  assistance  from  art,  which  indeed  would  have  been  unprofitably  employed 
in  this  instance,  for  the  difficulties  opposed  to  navigation  by  the  loss  of  this  channel  are 
by  no  means  compensated  for  by  the  recovery  of  the  land.  With  certain  winds,  vessels 
sailing  either  to  or  from  Whitehaven  are  much  hampered  in  rounding  the  Head,  and  in 
rough  weather  are  subject  to  delays  which  might  be  avoided  were  a  passage  open  for 
them  round  the  back  of  the  promontory.  It  has  been  thought  very  practicable  to  cut  a 
new  channel  for  the  sea  through  the  valley,  and  though  the  expense  of  such  a  work  would 
be  great,  it  would  be  well  bestowed  in  facilitating  the  trade  of  such  a  port  as  White- 
haven. 

We  made  a  trial  of  walking  along  the  base  of  the  Head,  intending  to  work  our 
passage  round  it,  but  the  fragments  of  rock  that  are  strewed  in  rugged  heaps  along  the 
shore  rendered  the  task  impracticable,  at  least  on  one  pair  of  legs.  Near  the  south  end 
there  has  lately  occurred  a  most  awful  fall  of  the  rocks,  a  segment  from  the  whole  front 
of  the  cliff  of  many  thousand  tons  having  given  way,  and  now  forming  a  stupendous 
pile  of  ruins,  thrown  together  in  the  wildest  disorder,  and  threatening  another  crash  as 
you  gaze  upon  them.  The  rocks  lie  in  vast  blocks,  squared  and  planed  with  a  regularity 
as  if  done  by  human  art,  and  the  whole  mass  might  be  supposed  the  ruins  of  a  castle, — of 
a  magnitude,  it  must  be  confessed,  suitable  only  for  a  race  of  giants. 

Ascending  to  the  summit  of  the  Head  we  walked  (with  perfect  safety,  let  me  say 
to  those  who  would  follow  us)  along  the  edge  of  the  precipice  till  we  came  to  a  singular 
ravine  intersecting  the  cliff  from  top  to  bottom,  the  sides  almost  perpendicular  and  meet- 
ing at  their  bases.  The  sea  flows  into  it  for  a  few  yards  over  a  beach  noted  for  the 
beauty  of  its  pebbles.  From  the  north  side  of  this  chasm  we  had  a  fine  view  of  the  pre- 
cipice to  the  south,  which  exhibited  a  very  grand  front,  sometimes  broken  by  hollows  and 
overhanging  crags,  and  in  places  as  smooth  and  perpendicular  as  a  wall. 

We  proceeded,  frequently  peeping  over  the  precipice,  to  tremble  at  its  depth  or  note 
some  change  in  the  configuration  or  posture  of  the  rocks,  till  our  particular  admiration 
was  called  forth  by  Cloven  Barf  (I  think  that  was  the  name),  a  rude  and  enormous  column, 
separated  from  the  summit  of  the  cliff  by  a  cleft  about  twelve  feet  wide  and  sixty  feet 

deep. 


VOYAGE  KOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  14? 

deep.  The  rock  at  its  base  is  so  much  broken,  that  it  appears  to  stand  very  insecurely, 
and  ere  long  the  huge  mass  must  come  thundering  down.  A  crazy  plank,  not  more  than 
a  foot  wide,  was  thrown  across  the  chasm,  a  pass  for  the  boys  in  their  attacks  upon  the  sea 
mews'  eggs.  Two  or  three  steps  and  the  trial  is  over — but  such  steps !  Diamonds  or 
glory  might  have  tempted  us,  but  eggs  could  not,  so  we  left  the  spot  without  making  any 
experiment  on  the  firmness  of  the  plank  or  our  nerves.  Near  the  northern  extremity  of 
the  promontory  there  is  a  lighthouse,  a  building  of  the  meanest  description,  and  provided 
with  a  very  bad  light  supplied  by  a  coal  fire.  I  imagine  that  a  light  in  this  situation  is 
admitted  to  be  of  very  little  use,  or  such  a  one  as  this  could  scarcely  be  submitted  to,  or 
escape  the  vigilant  observation  of  the  Trinity-House. 

At  the  most  northern  point  of  the  promontory  the  cliffs  rise  to  a  great  height,  and 
from  thence  to  its  termination  east  are  hollowed  out  into  a  series  of  deep  recesses,  with 
huge  buttresses  projecting  between  them,  presenting  an  endless  variety  in  the  forms  of  the 
broken  rocks,  which  roughen  their  multiplied  precipices.  Near  the  east  end  are  some 
large  quarries,  which  have  been  worked  to  a  great  extent.  The  stone  has  the  advantage 
of  being  very  easily  cut,  but  the  quality  of  softness,  which  recommends  it  to  the  quarriers 
and  masons,  rather  unfits  it  for  the  purposes  of  building.  It  hardens  on  exposure  to  the 
air,  but  when  first  used  is  very  susceptible  of  injury  from  rain.  It  is  a  practice  in  White- 
haven  to  rub  over  the  houses  built  of  this  stone  with  oil,  which  entirely  spoils  the  beauty 
of  its  colour,  but  is  found  materially  to  preserve  its  substance.  At  the  very  eastern 
extremity  of  the  Head,  and  at  an  elevation  of  about  thirty  feet  above  the  sea,  a  body  of 
gypsum  was  discovered  some  years  ago,  imbedded  in  the  sand-stone,  and  of  a  very  fine 
quality  and  pure  colour.  A  considerable  quantity  was  taken  from  it ;  but  the  bed  is  now, 
I  believe,  quite  exhausted. 

St.  Bees'  Head  is  far  loftier  than  any  of  the  surrounding  hills,  and  jutting  out  at  least 
a  mile  beyond  the  line  of  coast  on  each  side  of  it,  is  rendered  a  very  conspicuous  object, 
easily  distinguished  and  identified  by  seamen  from  a  great  distance.  From  its  northern 
side  a  steep  descent  leads  down  to  a  lower  step,  but  still  at  a  considerable  elevation 
above  the  sea;  the  country  continuing  to  the  northward  in  a  series  of  gentle  wavy  hills, 
beautifully  smooth  and  rounded,  their  broad,  swelling  surfaces  unvaried  by  trees  or  hedge- 
rows, but  covered  with  corn.  They  are  of  extraordinary  value,  fruitful  on  the  surface, 
and  containing  within  them  inexhaustible  beds  of  coal.  Some  of  them  yield  stone  for 
building,  and  limestone  of  a  very  pure  quality,  which,  used  as  a  manure,  gives  fertility  to 
the  whole  country  round.  The}'  terminate  along  the  shore  in  a  range  of  low  cliffs,  com- 
posed principally  of  white  sandstone,  between  the  strata  of  which  appear,  at  intervals, 
thin  layers  of  a  shattery,  slaty  stone,  with  veins  of  coal.  These  cliffs,  from  the  incompact- 
ness  of  their  structure,  have  suffered  more  than  common  injury  from  the  violence  of  the 
sea,  and  along  their  whole  line  have  a  most  ruinous  appearance.  The  shore  is  strewed 
with  fragments  tumbled  together  in  vast  heaps  at  their  base,  and  here  and  there  a  detached 

u  2  mass 


148  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

mass  shews  itself  above  the  sea,  beyond  low  water  mark.  They  rise  to  a  considerable 
height  immediately  south  of  Whitehaven,  where  they  are  remarkable  for  the  intermixture 
of  rocks  that  appear  on  the  surface.  The  main  rock  is  white  sand-stone,  alternating  Avith 
strata  of  red  sand-stone,  and  intersected  by  frequent  layers  of  shale  and  coal.  The  face 
of  the  cliff  at  this  point  is  singularly  broken,  being  divided  by  seams  and  fissures  of  all 
inclinations,  and  composing  a  pile  of  fragments  very  insecurely  held  together,  with  masses 
projecting  from  it  of  various  forms,  and  in  various  threatening  postures.  Portions  of  the 
rock  are  continually  falling,  and  the  Avhole  body  is  in  so  infirm  a  state,  that  a  slight  con- 
cussion is  able  to  bring  it  in  heaps  to  the  ground.  Some  guns  standing  on  a  fort  above  it 
are  now  never  fired,  the  shock  of  the  explosion  having  been  found  sufficient  to  dislodge 
these  tottering  rocks.  Two  poor  women  were  dashed  to  pieces  here  about  two  years  ago, 
by  a  falling  fragment,  which  they  had  brought  down  by  imprudently  picking  away  some 
coal  that  lay  under  it. 

As  we  walked  under  these  cliffs  we  remarked  a  variety  of  singular  appearances  in  the 
sand-stone,  among  the  ruins  that  lay  in  heaps  along  the  shore.  The  white  stone  is  fre- 
quently very  curiously  marked  by  the  red,  which  appears  in  slender  and  irregular  lines 
over  its  surface,  giving  it  a  resemblance  to  marble.  In  some  fragments  of  the  white  stone 
we  observed  small  portions  of  a  red  clay-stone  distributed  over  it  in  very  fanciful  figures, 
resembling  snakes  and  lizards,  and  other  creeping  things,  that  crawl  with  or  without  legs. 
These  might  have  appeared  very  ordinary  phenomena  to  practised  geologists,  but  ignorance 
gave  us  the  advantage  of  noticing  them  with  some  wonder  and  amusement. 

It  was  in  a  ramble  taken  a  day  or  two  after  our  survey  of  St.  Bees'  Head  that  these 
observations  were  made.  On  leaving  that  promontory  we  proceeded  by  a  road  a  short 
distance  from  the  cliffs,  till  we  came,  quite  by  surprise,  in  full  view  of  Whitehaven,  lying 
immediately  and  at  a  great  depth  below  us,  in  a  valley  opening  into  a  fine  harbour,  crowded 
with  shipping,  and  bounded  on  two  sides  by  vast  green  hills,  which  rise  very  abruptly 
from  the  streets,  and  give  the  town  an  extraordinary  and  very  romantic  appearance  of 
seclusion.  The  situation  has  a  pleasing  strangeness  and  novelty  about  it,  and  the  effect  of 
it  was  heightened  to  us  by  the  sudden  and  unexpected  manner  in  which  we  discovered  the 
place.  On  descending  from  St.  Bees'  Head  we  had  hills  before  us,  but  so  gradual  in  their 
risings,  that  they  were  scarcely  distinguishable  as  hills,  the  country  having  the  appearance 
only  of  an  elevated  plain,  varied  by  gentle  undulations,  but  not  divided  by  any  deep  or 
abrupt  valleys.  We  perceived  no  suburbs,  no  smoke,  no  indication  of  a  town,  and  walked 
on  not  guessing  from  whence  we  were  to  see  it,  or  what  concealed  it  from  us,  till  the 
whole  of  it  burst  upon  us  at  once,  every  street  and  roof  seen  at  a  single  glance,  and  lying 
sunk  beneath  us  like  a  subterranean  city.  Nor  were  we  less  struck  with  the  bustle  and 
rattle  of  the  place,  than  with  its  singular  aspect.  We  had  lately  been  strangers  to  crowds 
and  their  din,  and  coming  from  the  solitude  of  rocks  and  mountains,  were  well  prepared 
to  be  surprised  by  the  sudden  sight  of  this  large  town,  with  its  general  show  of  motion  and 

bustle, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  149 

bustle,  and  its  compound  of  noises,  made  up  by  the  hammers  of  shipwrights,  the  shouts  of 
the  seamen,  the  rattling  of  coal  waggons,  and  throngs  of  people  moving  amidst  smoke, 
and  dust,  and  dirt,  in  all  quarters  and  directions. 

On  descending  into  the  town,  the  charm  under  which  it  was  first  represented  to  us  was 
speedily  dispelled,  and  we  perceived  that  the  greater  half  of  it  was  mean  and  abominably 
dirty,  but  as  we  walked  about  there  was  still  something  very  pleasing  and  singular  in  the 
frequent  glimpses  that  we  caught  of  the  green  hills  through  the  openings  of  the  streets. 
Let  me  not  in  any  way  give  an  unfair  description  of  the  town,  nor  forget  to  state,  that 
though  it  is  disfigured  by  many  vile  alleys,  and  rows  of  shabby  and  filthy  cottages,  it 
has  two  or  three  very  respectable  streets,  one  of  them  dignified  at  one  end  by  a  large 
castellated  mansion,  the  residence  of  Lord  Lonsdale.  Most  of  the  houses  are  built  of  the 
red  stone  procured  from  St.  Bees'  Head,  but  the  fashion  of  the  county  is  not  dispensed 
with  here,  and  they  are  generally  covered  with  whitewash,  which  speedily  acquires  a 
dingy  hue,  and  shews  that  it  is  a  colour  of  all  others  the  worst  suited  to  the  black  business 
of  the  place.  A  little  variation  has  been  practised  in  the  application  of  this  favourite 
colour  to  the  tower  of  one  of  the  churches,  the  four  sides  being  alternately  red  and  white, 
and  this  conceit  has  been  submitted  to  as  a  tasteful  mode  of  decoration. 

With  certain  winds,  and  in  calm  weather,  Whitehaven,  from  its  inclosed  situation,  is 
smothered  with  smoke,  which  is  supplied  in  immoderate  quantities  by  the  furnaces  of 
various  works,  and  the  large  fires  which  the  cheapness  of  coals  here  enables  even  the 
poorest  inhabitants  to  indulge  in.  On  ascending  to  the  summit  of  the  west  hill,  on  a 
calm  morning,  I  was  much  struck  with  the  gloomy  aspect  of  the  valley.  I  was  breathing 
a  perfectly  pure  air,  with  a  fine  blue  sky  over  my  head,  while  beneath  me  a  pitchy  cloud 
of  smoke  hung  over  the  town,  which  was  rather  heard  than  seen ;  here  and  there  a  roof  or 
a  chimney  only  being  distinguishable  through  the  darkness.  There  was  something  strangely 
grand  in  the  effect,  which  was  that  of  a  town  concealing  within  it  the  ground-work  of  some 
vast  fire,  about  speedily  to  burst  into  flame.  From  the  same  eminence  from  whence  I 
looked  down  into  this  murky  gulf,  I  had  a  bright  and  lovely  prospect  over  a  great  expanse 
of  calm  blue  sea,  a  spacious  bay,  inclosed  by  the  winding  coast  of  Cumberland  as  far  as 
the  Solway  Frith,  and  by  a  long  extent  of  the  southern  coast  of  Scotland,  stretching  to  the 
westward  in  a  continued  series  of  hills  apparently  rising  from  the  sea,  their  summits  broken 
into  separate  masses  of  various  elevations,  and  exhibiting  a  beautiful  variety  of  forms. 

Whitehaven  owes  its  rise  entirely  to  the  Lowther  family,  who,  by  the  extensive  scale 
on  which  they  have  worked  their  valuable  mines  of  coal,  have  advanced  it,  within  a  hundred 
and  twenty  years,  from  an  obscure  hamlet  to  its  present  size  and  consequence.  It  now 
contains  about  fifteen  thousand  inhabitants,  and  the  number  is  continually  increasing.  It 
has  hitherto  engaged  in  few  manufactures,  but  some  are  now  on  the  point  of  being 
introduced.  A  sugar-house,  a  glass-house,  a  pottery,  and  a  vitriol  manufactory,  were  in 
a  state  of  forwardness  when  AVC  were  on  the  spot,  and  indicate  a  still  improving  place. 

Ship- 


150  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Ship-building  is  carried  on  here  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  on  a  system  that  has 
acquired  for  the  artificers  a  high  reputation.  Strength  is  the  great  desideratum  in  vessels 
employed  in  the  coal  trade,  and  the  shipwrights  here  have  the  art  of  giving  them  great 
solidity  and  firmness  without  clumsiness,  so  that  they  are  said  not  only  to  be  more  durable, 
but  to  sail  faster  than  vessels  of  the  same  description  from  any  other  port  in  the  kingdom. 
Ships  of  five  hundred  tons  are  frequently  built  here,  and  a  few  have  been  built  of  con- 
siderably greater  burthen. 

There  is  a  spacious  and  secure  harbour  at  Whitehaven,  situated  in  a  small  bay,  and 
guarded  by  two  strong  stone  piers,  with  a  breakwater  attached  to  one  of  them,  which 
defends  the  entrance  against  the  swell  of  the  sea.  Three  quays  project  from  the  town 
into  the  bason,  on  each  side  of  which  vessels  lie  and  receive  their  lading,  as  well  as  along 
the  whole  length  of  the  two  piers.  The  north  pier  is  a  vast  work,  of  an  angular  figure, 
four  hundred  and  fifty  yards  in  length,  and  twenty-eight  feet  in  height,  the  whole  paved, 
and  faced  with  a  fine  white  stone.  The  last  bend,  which  continues  to  the  head,  is  sixty- 
six  feet  in  breadth,  forming  a  delightful  promenade,  where  you  have  all  the  pleasure  and 
none  of  the  annoyances  of  being  at  sea ;  and  where,  as  you  turn  and  turn,  you  are  amused 
with  a  variety  of  pleasing  scenery,  and  a  moving  picture  of  life  and  bustle — on  one  side, 
the  harbour  with  all  its  shipping,  the  town  with  all  its  smoke,  and  the  high  majestic  hills 
which  tower  above  it;  and  on  the  other,  the  open  sea,  covered  with  vessels,  some  sunk 
nearly  to  the  water's  edge,  some  light  and  buoyant,  and  meeting  and  crossing  one  another 
as  they  sail  to  or  from  the  harbour. 

There  are  two  hundred  and  four  vessels  belonging  to  this  port,  carrying  27,989  tons. 
Out  of  this  number  sixty-two  vessels  are  employed  in  foreign  commerce,  seven  of  them 
directly  between  the  West  Indies  and  this  port,  and  the  others  between  the  West  Indies, 
North  America,  and  the  Baltic,  and  various  ports  of  Great  Britain.  Occasionally  some 
of  them  bring  home  to  this  place  cargoes  of  flax,  hemp,  timber,  &c.  The  remainder  of  the 
vessels,  their  number  142,  and  their  burthen  15,122  tons,  are  engaged  entirely  in  the 
exportation  of  coals ;  nor  do  they  include  the  whole  number  employed  in  this  business 
here,  for  many  colliers  belonging  to  Workington  and  Maryport  constantly  receive  their 
cargoes  at  Whitehaven.  The  quantity  of  coals  annually  exported  amounts  on  an  average 
to  400,000  tons,  which  are  taken  principally  to  the  east  coast  of  Ireland,  and  the  south  of 
Scotland.  The  quantity  seems  prodigious,  but  I  believe  that  I  have  not  over-rated  it. 
By  the  custom-house  books  it  appears  that  42,000  waggon  loads,  or  101,000  tons,  were 
shipped  in  the  quarter  ending  on  the  5th  of  October,  1814. 

The  whole  of  this  immense  business,  almost  the  sole  concern  of  a  large  and  populous 
town,  is  supported  by  a  single  individual,  Lord  Lonsdale,  who,  by  the  employment  of  a 
vast  capital,  has  given  the  utmost  facility  to  all  the  operations  required  in  working  the 
coals,  and  transporting  them  to  the  vessels.  His  lordship  has  a  large  iron-foundery  of  his 
own  at  Whitehaven,  which  is  kept  in  constant  exercise  in  order  to  supply  iron  for  the  rail- 
roads, 


Whiteheaven,  Cumberland 


Harrington,  near  Whitehaven,  Cumberland 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  151 

roads,  and  six  or  seven  steam-engines  and  a  variety  of  machinery  used  in  the  service  of 
the  mines.  One  may  form  some  idea  of  the  enormous  expense  of  this  single  material 
when  he  hears  that  there  are  twenty  miles  of  iron  rail-way  under  ground. 

Some  of  the  pits  lie  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  town,  and  the  coals  are  con- 
veyed from  them  to  the  vessels  in  waggons  containing  45  cwt.  each,  and  running  upon 
rail-roads.  It  would  appear  no  easy  matter  on  a  first  sight  to  conduct  these  heavy  loads 
with  safety  down  the  steep  faces  of  the  hills  which  flank  the  town,  but  it  is  managed 
without  any  kind  of  difficulty  or  danger.  The  waggons  descend  down  the  east  hill 
by  a  road  cut  in  traverses,  each  under  the  direction  of  one  man,  who  mounts  up  behind, 
and  pressing  occasionally  upon  one  of  the  wheels  with  a  wooden  bar,  fearlessly  rattles 
down  the  steep,  and  regulates  his  speed  at  pleasure.  Having  never  seen  any  thing  of  the 
kind  before,  I  was  very  much  entertained  with  the  various  contrivances  employed  in  the 
business  of  this  place,  and  particularly  with  these  self-impelled  waggons  rushing  down  the 
hill  with  an  impetuosity  that  might  have  alarmed  one  a  little,  had  it  not  been  for  the  cool 
and  careless  faces  of  the  helmsmen,  some  smoking  their  pipes,  and  others  accompanying 
the  rough  music  of  the  wheels  with  a  song.  On  arriving  at  the  south  pier,  the  waggons 
are  pushed  along  it  by  men  to  any  vessel  receiving  her  freight,  and  are  emptied  with  the 
utmost  ease  and  expedition.  Wooden  stages  are  constructed  at  intervals  along  the  pier, 
projecting  over  its  side,  with  holes  through  them  communicating  with  shoots  beneath, 
which  reach  down  nearly  to  the  vessel's  holds.  The  waggons  are  thrust  out  upon  these 
stages,  and  having  moveable  bottoms  which  drop  at  the  word  of  command,  their  whole 
contents  are  discharged  in  an  instant.  These  machines  are  emphatically  called  Hurries. 

The  descent  of  the  waggons  down  the  western  hill  has  been  simplified  by  a  contriv- 
ance which  saves  the  labour  of  forty  men  and  as  many  horses.  From  the  point  where  the 
declivity  of  the  hill  commences  a  regularly  inclined  plane  has  been  cut,  down  which  three 
waggons  in  a  string  roll  at  a  time.  The  loaded  waggons  pull  up  three  empty  ones  in 
their  descent,  but  this  counterpoise  does  not  sufficiently  reduce  their  speed,  and  they  are 
therefore  made  to  give  motion  to  some  machinery  which  requires  considerable  power, 
working  a  huge  pair  of  bellows  that  force  air  through  a  valve  into  a  receiver.  As  the  re- 
ceiver fills,  more  power  is  necessary  for  the  depression  of  the  bellows,  and  the  waggons  are 
thus  duly  checked  as  they  acquire  force  in  their  descent.  They  are  permitted,  however, 
to  roll  down  with  considerable  speed,  and  have  a  somewhat  formidable  look  to  a  person 
meeting  them,  who  is  precluded  by  a  bank  on  each  side  from  getting  more  than  a  yard 
out  of  their  way.  A  nervous  man  I  can  conceive  might,  in  the  agitation  of  his  useless 
precautions  to  avoid  them,  become  entangled  with  them ;  but  as  they  are  confined  to  a 
certain  tract  by  a  rail-road,  they  could  not  possibly,  even  were  the  rope  to  break,  get  out 
of  their  way  to  run  over  him.  A  gentleman  of  the  place  told  me  that  he  once  met  them 
when  they  were  running  down  with  tremendous  velocity,  the  people  having  forgotten  to 
attach  the  rope  to  them :  the  sight,  he  said,  was  quite  terrible,  and  a  man  not  at  all  nervous 

might 


152  VOY'AOE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

might  have  trembled  a  little  Avhen  he  felt  the  ground  shake  as  they  thundered  past  him. 
A  bulwark  erected  at  the  bottom  prevented  their  doing  any  mischief  beyond  their  own 
destruction  ;  but  when  they  struck  against  it,  they  were  dashed  to  atoms,  and  the  coals 
in  them  scattered  away  like  dust. 

The  inclined  plane  terminates  in  a  precipice  over  the  harbour,  with  a  series  of  brick 
arches  at  the  base,  supporting  a  large  storehouse  for  coals,  and  above  this  a  long  wooden 
gallery,  from  whence,  at  an  elevation  of  more  than  forty  feet,  the  coals  are  precipitated 
down  the  hurries  into  the  vessels,  45  cwt.  at  a  time.  There  are  five  hurries  along  this  side 
of  the  harbour,  immense,  uncouth  machines,  which  are  very  striking  to  the  eye  of  a 
stranger,  and  impress  themselves  not  less  forcibly  upon  his  ears.  On  passing  under  one 
of  them  for  the  first  time,  I  was  startled  by  the  sudden  descent  of  a  load  of  coals,  with  a 
deafening  crash  over  my  head,  which,  in  the  first  moment  of  surprise,  made  me  imagine 
that  there  could  be  little  hope  left  for  me. 

It  is  in  contemplation  to  make  an  inclined  plane  like  that  already  described,  with  a 
similar  termination,  on  the  opposite  hill,  and  when  it  is  completed,  the  town  will  possess 
every  possible  convenience  in  its  business  that  art  can  supply  or  money  purchase.  A 
waggon-load  of  coals  containing  45  cwt.  is  lodged  in  a  vessel's  hold  for  16s.  6d ,  including 
the  cost  of  the  material ;  a  very  moderate  sum  it  would  appear,  when  we  advert  to  the 
labour  and  expense  of  working  the  mines  and  transporting  the  coals  to  the  harbour;  but 
the  masters  of  vessels  complain  that  the  charge  is  too  great,  reducing  their  profits,  after 
the  deduction  of  their  own  expenses,  to  a  sum  very  inadequate  to  the  value  of  their 
services.  One  cannot  on  a  cursory  view  of  the  case  assent  to  the  reasonableness  of  their 
complaints,  for  they  usually  make  a  profit  of  seventeen  or  eighteen  shillings  upon  every 
ton  of  coals  that  they  sell. 

Having  seen  all  the  operations  connected  with  the  coals  above-ground,  I  was  de- 
termined before  I  left  Whitehaven  to  descend  down  one  of  the  pits  and  see  the  wonders 
below.  A  gentleman  of  the  place,  who  had  himself  frequently  made  the  experiment,  and 
who  from  his  knowledge  was  well  able  to  satisfy  the  questions  and  hesitations  of  a  novice, 
kindly  consented  to  bear  me  company.  The  William  Pitt  mine  was  the  scene  of  my  ad- 
venture, the  last  opened  and  said  to  be  the  best  planned  work  of  its  kind,  and  the  most 
complete  in  all  its  conveniencies  of  any  in  the  kingdom.  The  shaft  leading  down  to  it  is 
near  the  foot  of  the  hill,  which  flanks  the  town  to  the  east.  Having  equipped  ourselves 
in  a  dress  suited  to  the  dirtiness  of  our  expedition,  we  repaired  to  the  spot,  and  I  took  a 
peep  into  the  black  and  bottomless  hole  without  shrinking  from  my  determination  to  go 
down.  The  coals  are  drawn  up  in  baskets,  13  cwt.  at  a  time,  by  the  power  of  steam. 
The  shaft  is  divided  into  three  parts,  one  for  the  ejection  of  water,  one  for  the  operations 
of  the  engine,  and  one  for  the  basket.  Preparatory  to  our  descent,  our  guide,  one  of  the 
stewards,  cried  out,  "  Coming  down,"  to  the  people  below,  a  warning  which  is  also  attended 
to  by  the  man  at  the  engine,  who  moderates  its  speed  when  any  one  is  about  to  descend. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  1.53 

The  voice  was  answered  from  the  depths  below  by  a  strange,  hollow,  distant,  but  loud  cry, 
which  rather  thrilled  through  my  marrow — but  I  had  now  advanced  too  far  in  the  busi- 
ness to  retreat  with  honour.  We  fixed  ourselves  in  the  basket,  standing,  with  our  hands 
grasping  the  chain,  the  word  was  given,  and  down  we  glided  with  a  smooth  and  scarcely 
perceptible  motion  through  a  duct  about  six  feet  in  diameter,  and  wooded  all  round. 
I  kept  my  eyes  fixed  on  the  aperture  above,  which  contracted  as  I  fell,  till  at  a  vast  depth 
I  was  obliged  to  look  down,  as  my  head  grew  dizzy,  and  small  pieces  of  coal  and  drops 
of  water  struck  with  unpleasant  force  against  my  face.  As  we  descended  lower  all  be- 
came darkness,  the  noise  over  our  heads  grew  gradually  more  indistinct,  till  it  died  away, 
and  a  dreary  silence  ensued,  broken  only  occasionally  by  the  grating  of  the  basket  against 
the  walls.  At  length,  after  a  descent  of  five  hundred  and  seventy-six  feet,  I  heard  the 
voices  of  men  below  me,  and  presently  perceived  two  dim  lights.  These  were  at  the 
High  Eye,  formerly  the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  on  a  level  with  which  is  a  great  extent  of 
workings.  I  asked  no  questions  here — "  steady  the  basket,"  cried  our  guide,  and  in  a 
moment  we  were  again  in  utter  darkness.  In  a  quarter  of  a  minute  more  I  heard  other 
voices  below  me — the  basket  stopped,  and  we  soon  found  ourselves  on  our  feet  at  the 
bottom,  six  hundred  and  thirty  feet  from  the  light. 

I  could  here  distinguish  nothing  but  a  single  candle,  with  the  obscure  form  of  a  man 
by  it — all  around  was  pitch  dark,  not  a  ray  of  light  reaching  the  bottom  from  the  mouth 
of  the  shaft.  Before  we  proceeded  to  explore  the  mine,  we  were  recommended  to  remain 
quiet  a  little  in  order  to  collect  ourselves,  and  while  we  were  thus  striving  to  be  composed, 
my  nerves  were  momentarily  shocked  by  a  combination  and  succession  of  strange  noises, 
among  which  the  loud  clank  of  the  chain,  as  the  empty  basket  dashed  to  the  ground,  was 
particularly  offensive.  I  never  saw  the  object,  and  had  no  notice  of  its  approach  till  its 
infernal  crash  always  came  to  make  me  jump  out  of  myself.  While  we  were  conversing 
here  on  the  possible  accidents  that  might  occur  in  ascending  or  descending  in  the  basket, 
we  were  told  of  a  poor  woman  who  lately  had  an  extraordinary  escape.  It  was  her  busi- 
ness to  attach  the  chain  to  the  basket,  and  while  she  was  in  the  act  of  doing  this,  her  hand 
became  somehow  entangled,  and  the  man  at  the  engine  setting  it  in  motion  before  the 
proper  time,  she  was  pulled  from  the  ground  before  she  could  extricate  herself,  and  dragged 
up,  as  she  hung  by  one  arm,  to  the  top  of  the  pit,  with  no  injury  but  a  slight  laceration  of 
her  hand. 

I  had  not  become  quite  reconciled  to  the  clank  of  the  chain  when  we  were  summoned 
to  go  on.  From  the  foot  of  the  shaft  we  proceeded  through  a  very  long  passage  cut 
througli  rock,  with  the  roof  arched,  and  like  the  sides  faced  with  bricks  and  whitewashed. 
All  the  rock  passages  throughout  the  mine  are  faced  with  bricks  in  a  similar  manner,  an 
enormously  expensive  precaution,  but  absolutely  necessary  to  prevent  the  falling  down  of 
loose  fragments  of  stone.  I  cannot  describe  scientifically,  or  with  any  degree  of  clearness 
and  certainty,  all  the  methods  of  proceeding  that  have  been  adopted  in  laying  out  these 
VOL.  it.  x  vast 


154  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

vast  subterranean  works,  and  indeed  such  an  account  is  scarcely  called  for,  as  the  mine 
no  doubt  very  much  resembles  in  its  general  plan  many  others  that  have  been  often  de- 
scribed. In  its  present  state,  as  far  as  I  could  ascertain  as  I  groped  my  way  through  the 
darkness,  it  appeared,  in  the  meeting  and  crossing  of  its  numerous  passages,  to  resemble 
the  streets  of  a  city — and  of  a  city  of  no  mean  extent,  for  \ve  sometimes  walked  for  nearly 
half  a  mile  without  turning,  between  walls  of  coal  or  rock.  To  the  right  and  left  of  the 
long  lanes  are  workings,  hollow  spaces,  five  yards  wide  and  twenty  deep,  between  each  of 
which  a  solid  column,  fifteen  yards  wide  and  twenty  deep,  is  left  for  the  support  of  the 
roof,  so  that  only  one  third  of  a  bed  of  coal  is  taken  away.  Mr.  Pennant  observed  that 
these  columns  appeared  to  him  to  be  stores  for  future  fuel,  but  they  are  left  standing 
merely  from  necessity,  and  no  material  portion  of  them  could  be  removed  without  danger 
to  the  great  superstructure  which  they  tend  to  uphold. 

The  coals  are  dragged  from  the  workings  in  baskets,  one  at  a  time,  by  horses,  and 
carried  to  a  place  of  general  rendezvous,  where  by  means  of  a  crane  they  are  placed  on  to 
the  trams,  nine  of  which,  bearing  a  burthen  of  nearly  six  tons,  are  drawn  by  a  single  horse 
to  the  shaft.  A  tram  is  a  square  board  supported  by  four  very  low  wheels,  and  a  horse 
drags  nine  of  them  with  their  full  cargo  along  an  iron  rail-way,  without  any  apparent 
effort. 

The  ventilation  of  the  mine  in  its  remotest  corners  is  said  to  be  as  perfect  as  is  neces- 
sary, though  I  confess  that  in  some  places  I  felt  no  little  difficulty  in  breathing.  The  air 
is  rarefied  by  heat  from  a  large  fire  kept  constantly  burning,  and  the  current  directed  to 
the  various  workings  through  conduits  formed  by  boarded  partitions  placed  about  a  foot  dis- 
tant from  the  walls.  Doors  are  placed  at  intervals  in  the  long  passages,  which  stop  the 
air  in  its  course,  and  force  it  through  the  conduits  in  the  workings  to  the  right  or  left. 
A  current  of  air  circulating  through  a  multiplicity  of  foul  and  heated  passages  and  cham- 
bers, must  necessarily  become  languid  in  its  motion  and  impure  in  its  quality  as  it  gets 
remote  from  its  source;  but  though  I  had  occasionally  to  complain  of  some  obstruction  in 
the  freedom  of  my  respiration,  our  guide  declared  that  he  never  felt  the  slightest  incon- 
venience. I  am  not  however  inclined  to  generalize  on  the  authority  of  this  person's  per- 
ception of  the  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  for  in  the  midst  of  every  kind  of  abomination  that 
could  be  offensive  to  the  eyes,  ears,  and  nose  of  a  man,  who  felt  as  a  man,  he  walked 
along  as  if  he  had  no  senses,  or  senses  quite  distinct  from  my  own,  with  the  most  profound 
unconcern. 

The  sensations  excited  in  me  as  I  was  descending  down  the  pit  did  not  readily  sub- 
side, and  I  wandered  about  the  mine  with  my  mind  very  much  upon  the  alert,  and  under 
an  indistinct  apprehension  of  some  possible  danger  which  gave  intensity  to  my  interest 
in  every  thing  that  I  heard  and  saw.  A  dreariness  pervaded  the  place  which  struck  upon 
the  heart — one  felt  as  if  beyond  the  bounds  allotted  to  man  or  any  living  being,  and  trans- 
ported to  some  hideous  region  unblest  by  every  charm  that  cheers  and  adorns  the  habitable 

world. 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  155 

world.  We  traced  our  way  through  passage  after  passage  in  the  blackest  darkness,  some- 
times rendered  more  awful  by  a  death-like  silence,  which  was  now  and  then  broken  by 
the  banging  of  some  distant  door,  or  an  explosion  of  gunpowder,  that  pealed  with  a  loud 
and  long  report  through  the  unseen  recesses  of  the  mine,  and  gave  us  some  idea  of  its  vast 
extent.  Occasionally  a  light  appeared  in  the  distance  before  us,  which  did  not  dispel  the 
darkness  so  as  to  discover  by  whom  it  was  borne,  but  advanced  like  a  meteor  through 
the  gloom,  accompanied  by  a  loud  rumbling  noise,  the  cause  of  which  was  not  explained 
to  the  eye  till  we  were  called  upon  to  make  way  for  a  horse,  which  passed  by  with  its 
long  line  of  baskets,  and  driven  by  a  young  girl,  covered  with  filth,  debased  and  profligate, 
and  uttering  some  low  obscenity  as  she  hurried  by  us.  We  were  frequently  interrupted 
in  our  march  by  the  horses  proceeding  in  this  manner  with  their  cargoes  to  the  shaft,  and 
always  driven  by  girls,  all  of  the  same  description,  ragged  and  beastly  in  their  appearance, 
and  with  a  shameless  indecency  in  their  behaviour,  which,  awe-struck  as  one  was  by  the 
gloom  and  loneliness  around  one,  had  something  quite  frightful  in  it,  and  gave  the  place 
the  character  of  a  hell.  All  the  people  whom  we  met  with  were  distinguished  by  an  ex- 
traordinary wretchedness;  immoderate  labour  and  a  noxious  atmosphere  had  marked 
their  countenances  with  the  signs  of  disease  and  decay;  they  were  mostly  half  naked, 
blackened  all  over  with  dirt,  and  altogether  so  miserably  disfigured  and  abused,  that  they 
looked  like  a  race  fallen  from  the  common  rank  of  men,  and  doomed,  as  in  a  kind  of 
purgatory,  to  wear  away  their  lives  in  these  dismal  shades. 

I  was  much  affected  at  the  sight  of  the  first  individual  whom  I  saw  in  one  of  the 

O 

workings.  He  was  sitting  on  a  heap  of  coals,  pausing  from  his  labour,  at  the  extremity  of 
a  narrow  cavern,  as  gloomy  a  prison  as  ever  was  beheld.  When  we  approached  him  he 
looked  up,  and  shewed  a  countenance  which  might  have  been  that  from  which  Sterne  drew 
his  portrait  of  a  captive.  He  was  an  old  man,  and  suffering  had  so  added  to  the  effects 
of  age  in  his  looks,  that  it  was  truly  pitiable  to  see  so  worn  and  wasted  a  creature  still 
owing  to  hard  labour  the  support  of  his  cheerless  life.  He  was  naked  down  to  his  waist, 
and  exposed  a  body  lean  and  emaciated :  his  hair  was  grey,  and  his  face  deeply  furrowed 
and  seamed  with  lines  made  by  streams  of  sweat  that  had  trickled  down  his  blackened 
skin — a  figure  expressive  of  more  wretchedness  and  humiliation  than  I  ever  saw  before  in 
a  human  being.  This  man  was  considered  a  very  fortunate  person,  for  he  had  worked 
forty-two  years  in  the  mines  and  never  met  with  an  accident.  Few  of  the  miners  had 
served  a  third  of  this  time  who  could  not  shew  some  marks  of  the  dangers  of  their  employ- 
ment, either  from  the  firing  of  hydrogene  or  the  fall  of  fragments  of  rock  or  coal.  The 
coal  is  sometimes  so  loose  and  shattery  that  it  cannot  be  safely  worked  without  more  cau- 
tion than  is  often  practised  by  the  miners,  who,  if  they  escape  all  injury  for  one  day,  are 
apt  to  forget  on  another  that  there  can  be  any  danger. 

One  class  of  sufferers  in  the  mine  moved  rny  compassion  more  than  any  other,  a 
number  of  children  who  attend  at  the  doors  to  open  them  when  the  horses  pass  through, 

x  2  and 


156  VOYAGE    IIOUND    GREAT    BUIT.llX. 

and  who  in  this  duty  are  compelled  to  linger  through  their  lives,  in  silence,  solitude,  and 
darkness,  for  sixpence  a  day.  When  I  first  came  to  one  of  these  doors,  I  saw  it  open 
without  perceiving  by  what  means,  till,  looking  behind  it,  I  beheld  a  miserable  little 
wretch  standing  without  a  light,  silent  and  motionless,  and  resembling  in  the  abjectness  of 
its  condition  some  reptile  peculiar  to  the  place,  rather  than  a  human  creature.  On 
speaking  to  it  I  was  touched  with  the  patience  and  uncomplaining  meekness  with  which 
it  submitted  to  its  horrible  imprisonment,  and  the  little  sense  that  it  had  of  the  barbarity 
of  its  unnatural  parents.  Few  of  the  children  thus  inhumanly  sacrificed  were  more  than 
eight  years  old,  and  several  were  considerably  less,  and  had  barely  strength  sufficient 
to  perform  the  office  that  was  required  from  them.  On  their  first  introduction  into  the 
mine  the  poor  little  victims  struggle  and  scream  with  terror  at  the  darkness,  but  there  are 
found  people  brutal  enough  to  force  them  to  compliance,  and  after  a  few  trials  they 
become  tame  and  spiritless,  and  yield  themselves  up  at  least  without  noise  and  resistance 
to  any  cruel  slavery  that  it  pleases  their  masters  to  impose  upon  them.  In  the  winter- 
time they  never  see  day-light  except  on  a  Sunday,  for  it  has  been  discovered  that  they 
can  serve  for  thirteen  hours  a  day  without  perishing,  and  they  are  pitilessly  compelled  to 
such  a  term  of  solitary  confinement,  with  as  little  consideration  for  the  injury  that  they 
suffer,  as  is  felt  for  the  hinges  and  pullies  of  the  doors  at  which  they  attend.  As  soon  as 
they  rise  from  their  beds  they  descend  down  the  pit,  and  they  are  not  relieved  from  their 
prison  till,  exhausted  with  watching  and  fatigue,  they  return  to  their  beds  again.  Surely 
the  savages  who  murder  the  children  which  they  cannot  support  are  merciful  compared 
with  those  who  devote  them  to  a  life  like  this. 

After  rambling  about  for  nearly  an  hour  through  the  mazes  of  the  mine,  occasionally 
meeting  a  passenger,  or  visiting  a  labourer  in  his  solitary  cell,  we  were  conducted  to  a 
spacious  apartment,  where  our  ears  were  saluted  with  the  sound  of  many  voices  mingling 
together  in  noisy  merriment.  This  was  a  place  of  rendezvous  whither  the  baskets  of  coals 
were  brought  from  the  workings  and  fixed  on  the  trams,  and  a  party  of  men  and  girls  had 
met  together  here,  who  were  joining  in  a  general  expression  of  mirth,  that  was  strangely 
contrasted  with  the  apparent  misery  of  their  condition,  and  the  dreariness  of  the  spot 
where  they  were  assembled.  There  was  an  unusual  quantity  of  light  in  this  chamber 
which  showed  its  black  roof  and  walls,  and  shone  upon  the  haggard  faces  and  ruffian-like 
figures  of  the  people,  who  were  roaring  with  laughter  at  a  conversation  which  outraged  all 
decency,  and  resembled,  as  it  appeared  to  my  imagination,  a  band  of  devils.  Some  coarse 
jokes  levelled  at  myself  and  my  companion,  which  we  did  not  think  it  prudent  either  to 
parry  or  return,  drove  us  from  this  boisterous  assembly,  and  we  were  soon  hidden  again 
in  the  silent  and  lonely  depths  of  the  mine. 

Our  guide  now  led  us  to  a  passage  where,  in  a  small  stream  of  water  that  flowed 
through  it,  we  heard  some  air  bubbling  up  which  he  knew  to  be  hydrogene :  he  applied 
a  candle  to  it,  when  it  instantly  took  fire,  burning  with  a  clear  blueish  light,  in  a  flame 

not 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  157 

not  larger  than  that  from  a  small  lamp.  It  continued  visible  when  we  had  receded  to  a 
considerable  distance  from  it,  and  had  a  very  beautiful  appearance,  shining  like  a  brilliant 
star  in  the  darkness,  and  giving  an  effect  of  exceeding  depth  to  the  gloomy  avenue  before 
us.  While  we  were  gazing  at  it  with  the  profoundest  stillness  around  us,  we  were  startled 
by  a  report  as  loud  as  a  clap  of  thunder,  proceeding  from  an  explosion  of  gunpowder. 
On  going  to  the  spot  from  whence  it  came,  we  found  some  men  working  a  passage 
through  a  bed  of  rock,  called,  in  the  language  of  miners,  a  fault,  a  phenomenon  too 
familiar  in  coal  mines  to  require  any  comment  from  me.  This  part  of  the  mine  was  very 
remote  from  the  shaft,  and  so  imperfectly  ventilated,  that  the  heat  and  stench  in  it  were 
scarcely  supportable. 

Not  far  from  this  place  our  guide  regarded  me  with  a  very  big  and  significant  look, 
and  produced  all  the  effect  that  he  intended  on  my  mind  when  he  informed  me  that  I 
was  walking  under  the  sea,  and  had  probably  ships  sailing  over  my  head.  Considering 
this  as  the  most  extraordinary  situation  that  we  had  been  in  during  our  subterranean  ex- 
cursion, he  pulled  out  a  bottle  of  spirits  from  his  pocket  and  drank  our  healths  and  a  safe 
return  to  us,  with  all  due  solemnity.  This  rite  fulfilled  we  turned  our  steps  towards  the 
shaft,  oppressed  by  the  heat  and  foulness  of  the  air,  and  anxious  again  to  see  the  day. 
We  had  walked  about  four  miles  in  various  directions,  but  had  not  explored  half  the 
mine,  even  in  its  lower  part,  and  had  a  labyrinth  of  excavations  over  our  heads,  as  nu- 
merous and  extensive  as  those  through  which  we  had  been  rambling,  and  separated  from 
them  by  a  roof  only  nine  fathoms  thick.  I  was  astonished  to  hear  that  the  whole  of  this 
immense  work  was  the  labour  of  scarcely  ten  years — that  the  extensive  space  through 
which  we  had  passed,  and  the  whole  mine  that  we  had  left  unexplored,  were  Avithin  this 
short  period  a  solid  body  of  coal  and  rock.  The  labour  going  on  before  our  eyes  appeared 
quite  insignificant,  and  imagination  could  scarcely  conceive  the  formation  by  such  means 
of  this  vast  place,  which  struck  one  rather  as  some  strange  creation  by  the  giant  hands  of 
nature. 

Wre  ascended  to  the  higher  works  by  a  very  steep  path,  which,  at  an  elevation  of 
about  sixty  feet  from  the  lower  level,  opens  into  the  shaft.  The  miners  figuratively  call 
the  shaft  the  eye  of  the  mine,  and  this  inlet  into  the  upper  excavations  is  denominated 
the  High  Eye.  It  was  here  that  our  guide  had  given  his  warning  of  '  steady  the  basket,' 
lest  it  should  strike  against  the  landing  in  its  descent.  All  the  coals  procured  from  the 
under  workings  were  formerly  dragged  up  to  this  point  by  horses,  but  the  task  was  found 
so  difficult  and  tedious  that  it  was  thought  expedient  to  sink  the  shaft  to  its  present  level. 
From  the  edge  of  the  landing-place  at  the  High  Eye,  I  had  a  peep  at  the  day  through  the 
opening  which  appeared  at  a  dreadful  height  above  my  head,  and  contracted  to  a  spot  not 
bigger  than  the  palm  of  my  hand. 

As  we  were  not  promised  a  sight  of  any  novelty  in  the  upper  mine,  we  did  not  enter 
it,  but  returned  to  the  lower  one,  from  whence  we  proceeded  to  the  shaft  of  the  James 

mine, 


156  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

mine,  through  a  long  up-cast  passage,  which,  in  consequence  of  a  late  accident,  exhibits 
one  of  the  most  awful  spectacles  that  can  be  conceived.  An  unusual  quantity  of  coals 
were  taken  from  it,  and  it  was  thought  necessary,  for  the  support  of  the  roof,  to  plant  two 
rows  of  posts  under  it,  which  were  composed  of  the  trunks  of  the  largest  oaks  that  could 
be  procured.  They  had  not  been  fixed  long  when  the  roof  began  to  sink,  descending  very 
slowly,  but  with  irresistible  force,  and  bending  or  breaking  every  tree  that  stood  beneath 
it.  It  did  not  sink  much  more  than  a  foot,  and  people  now  pass  fearlessly  under  it,  in  the 
conviction  that  it  has  permanently  settled.  The  passage,  however,  bears  a  very  tremen- 
dous appearance,  and  I  did  not  go  through  it  without  some  agitation.  The  broken  and 
splintered  trees  still  remain,  and  are  such  formidable  mementos  of  the  insecurity  of  the 
roof,  that  I  involuntarily  quickened  my  pace  as  I  looked  at  them,  lest  I  should  hear  the 
coals  again  cracking  over  my  head.  This  part  of  our  expedition  was  rendered  exceedingly 
disagreeable  by  a  sulphurous  stream  of  water  which  flowed  down  the  steep,  casting  forth 
an  odour  which  touched  even  the  nose  of  our  guide.  At  the  top  of  the  passage  are  the 
stables  belonging  to  the  two  mines,  in  which  forty  horses  are  kept,  which  never  see  the 
light.  The  animals  were  all  remarkably  sleek  and  fat,  seeming  to  suffer  no  degree  of 
injury  from  the  impurity  of  the  air,  so  pernicious  to  man.  They  have  one  advantage 
over  their  fellow-labourers  of  the  nobler  species,  in  being  subject  only  to  moderate  work, 
and  this  may  be  one  cause  of  their  superior  plumpness  and  healthiness. 

After  leaving  the  stables  I  soon  heard  the  clank  of  the  basket  chain  in  the  James's 
pit,  which  called  upon  me  to  collect  my  resolution  for  the  journey  that  awaited  me  before 
I  could  again  be  lodged  in  safety  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  This  pit  is  not  so  deep,  by 
a  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  as  that  by  which  we  descended,  and  a  faint  circle  of  daylight 
appeared  on  the  ground  at  the  bottom,  which,  sick  as  I  was  of  the  darkness,  1  thought 
very  beautiful.  The  man  at  the  engine  having  been  warned  that  we  were  about  to 
ascend,  we  again  committed  ourselves  to  the  basket,  and  soon  mounted  aloft,  gliding 
through  the  void  so  softly  and  silently,  that  one  might  have  imagined  oneself  under  the 
wand  of  an  enchanter.  I  watched  the  light  with  some  anxiety  as  it  strengthened  upon 
the  faces  of  my  companions,  till  we  reached  the  top,  where  the  bright  sky,  and  the  fields, 
and  the  sea,  and  the  busy  crowd  of  people,  and  all  the  cheerful  bustle  of  life,  burst  upon 
my  view  with  an  effect  in  the  highest  degree  exhilarating  and  delightful. 

I  had  certainly  been  very  much  entertained  in  the  mine,  and  did  not  consider  the 
annoyances  that  I  endured,  or  the  danger  that  I  imagined  as  overbalancing  the  amuse- 
ment of  my  visit  to  it.  The  time  spent  in  the  basket  was  a  trial  of  the  nerves  not  speedily 
to  be  forgotten,  though  a  man  should  scarcely  venture  to  talk  of  nerves  on  such  an  occa- 
sion, for  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  ladies  to  go  down  the  pit,  and  I  have  not  heard  of 
any  who  behaved  otherwise  than  with  courage  and  patience.  Accidents  sometimes  hap- 
pen from  the  inveterate  carelessness  of  the  people,  who,  in  their  familiarity  with  danger, 
lose  all  thought  of  caution.  A  few  days  before  I  descended,  the  rope  had  broken  while 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  159 

the  empty  basket  was  going  down,  not  in  consequence  of  any  imperfection,  that  could 
not  be  reasonably  suspected,  but  from  having  been  worn  out  by  long  use.  And  yet  there 
are  people  appointed  to  superintend  all  the  machinery  employed  in  the  mines,  and  see, 
from  time  to  time,  that  it  is  trust- worthy.  The  ropes  used  in  these  pits  are  flat,  and  are 
much  more  durable  than  round  ropes,  being  less  apt  to  be  cramped  or  cracked  as  they 
roll  round  the  windlass.  A  rope  will  last  for  three  or  four  years,  and  this  durability  it  is 
that  encourages  the  thoughtlessness  of  those  to  whose  observation  they  are  trusted. 

There  are  several  passages  into  the  mines  by  inclined  planes,  and  six  shafts ;  three,  at 
considerable  distances  from  each  other,  on  each  side  of  the  town.  The  mines  comprehend 
a  connexion  of  workings  from  six  to  seven  miles  in  extent  east  and  west,  and  from  two  to 
three  miles  on  the  transverse  line.  The  whole  of  the  town  is  undermined,  without  the 
least  danger,  as  is  supposed,  to  its  security ;  and  the  workings  extend  under  the  harbour, 
and  seven  hundred  yards  under  the  sea.  Six  hundred  people,  of  various  descriptions,  are 
employed  under  ground,  and  more  than  a  hundred  horses.  1  was  surprised  to  see  so  few 
men  labouring  at  the  excavations,  till  I  learned  the  quantity  of  work  that  a  single  individual 
can  perform.  A  man  can  separate  five  tons  of  coals  in  a  day,  and  this  is  not  considered 
as  an  extraordinary  exertion.  Twenty  score  of  baskets,  each  basket  containing  13  cwt.  of 
coals,  are  drawn  up  from  each  of  the  six  pits  every  day,  which,  calculating  six  days  in 
the  week,  makes  the  annual  quantity  of  coals  separated  from  the  mines  amount  to 
486,720  tons. 

In  one's  admiration  of  these  vast  results  of  industry  and  contrivance,  one  may  spare 
a  thought  on  the  condition  of  the  people  employed,  who  are  sunk  into  a  state  of  the  lowest 
wretchedness  and  wickedness.  I  have  no  disposition  to  indulge  in  any  affectation  of  fine 
feeling,  or  to  signalize  my  philanthropy  by  any  idle  sentimentality  about  the  ordinary 
hardships  incident  to  the  labouring  classes.  The  wants  of  society  make  it  unavoidable 
that  some  of  us  should  suffer  under  disgusting  and  unwholesome  occupations.  We  must 
have  coals,  and  men  must  be  found  to  dig  them,  in  contempt  of  evils  that  embitter  and 
shorten  their  lives.  But  if,  in  consideration  of  the  general  good  of  the  community,  it  is 
not  fit  that  we  should  regard  partial  misery  with  too  keen  a  sensibility,  it  is  not  necessary 
that  we  should  run  into  the  opposite  extreme,  and  view  with  total  indifference  the  con- 
dition of  those  who  are  toiling  and  suffering  for  our  advantage.  The  people  in  the  mines 
are  looked  upon  as  mere  machinery,  of  no  worth  or  importance  beyond  their  horse  power. 
The  strength  of  a  man  is  required  in  excavating  the  workings,  women  can  drive  the  horses, 
and  children  can  open  the  doors ;  and  a  child  or  a  woman  is  sacrificed,  where  a  man  is 
not  required,  as  a  matter  of  economy,  that  makes  not  the  smallest  account  of  human  life 
in  its  calculations.  In  consequence  of  the  employment  of  women  in  the  mines,  the  most 
abominable  profligacy  prevails  among  the  people.  One  should  scarcely  have  supposed 
that  there  would  be  any  temptations  to  sin  in  these  gloomy  and  loathsome  caverns,  but 
they  are  made  the  scenes  of  the  most  bestial  debauchery.  If  a  man  and  woman  meet  in 

them, 


160  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

them,  and  are  excited  by  passion  at  the  moment,  they  indulge  it,  without  pausing  to 
enquire  if  it  be  father  and  daughter,  or  brother  and  sister,  that  are  polluting  themselves 
with  incest.  In  recording  this  shocking  fact,  I  speak  from  authority  that  is  not  to  be 
doubted.  Great  God  !  and  can  nothing  be  done  for  the  redemption  of  these  wretched 
slaves  ?  Is  it  unavoidable,  that  while  they  give  up  almost  every  blessing  of  life,  they  must 
sacrifice  soul  as  well  as  body?  These  dismal  dungeons  are  certainly  not  fit  places  for 
women  and  children,  the  removal  of  whom  would  be  an  act  of  humanity  not  dearly  paid 
for,  though  it  should  wring  a  few  pounds  from  the  hard  economy  that  rules  their  service. 
The  estimation  in  which  women  are  held  is  one  test  of  the  civilization  of  a  people ;  and  it 
is  somewhat  scandalous,  in  a  country  of  gallant  men,  to  see  them  sacrificed  to  the  rough 
drudgery  of  coal  mines.  If  there  were  nothing  but  the  filthiness  of  their  occupation  to 
complain  of,  it  would  be  no  extravagant  refinement,  to  feel  that  their  sex  should  preserve 
them  from  it ;  it  is  not  a  little  offensive  to  see  them  changed  into  devils  in  their  appear- 
ance, but  it  is  afflicting  indeed  to  witness  the  perversion  that  takes  place  in  their  moral 
character.  They  lose  every  quality  that  is  graceful  in  woman,  and  become  a  set  of  coarse, 
licentious  wretches,  scorning  all  kind  of  restraint,  and  yielding  themselves  up,  with  shame- 
less audacity,  to  the  most  detestable  sensuality.  Their  abominations  are  confined  during 
the  day  to  the  dark  recesses  of  the  mines ;  but  at  night  they  are  cast  up  from  the  pits  like 
a  pestilence,  to  contaminate  the  town.  We  must  have  coals,  as  I  have  said,  but  we  may 
have  them  through  the  intercession  of  a  little  humanity  and  liberality,  without  this  lavish 
waste  of  morality. 

I  have  already  adverted  to  the  hapless  condition  of  the  children  confined  under 
ground,  and  I  willingly  say  a  word  or  two  more  in  their  behalf.  Such  an  abuse  of  them 
is,  without  doubt,  in  the  highest  degree  disgraceful  to  those  who  command  their  services, 
and  calls  for  execration  from  every  mind  that  is  open  to  any  feelings  of  kindness  and 
charity.  We  have  lately  raised  a  cry  that  will  save  thousands,  in  a  distant  country,  from 
the  pains  and  the  ignominy  of  a  miserable  slavery,  and  should  not  behold  with  unconcern 
any  thing  that  bears  the  stamp  of  slavery  at  home.  I  am  not  comparing  the  injury  done 
to  these  children  to  the  wide- spread  mischief  of  the  slave  trade,  but  they  may  both  be 
referred  to  the  same  kind  of  cold-blooded  tyranny  ;  and  a  man  torn  from  his  country  and 
his  home,  and  forced  under  the  lash  of  a  task-master,  in  a  foreign  land,  has  scarcely  more 
reason  to  complain  of  injustice  and  cruelty  than  a  child  thus  dragged  from  the  light,  from 
all  the  natural  joys  in  which  childhood  delights,  and  buried  in  a  dark  solitude  for  thirteen 
hours  a  day.  One  might  have  imagined,  that  in  this  country  at  least  children  might  be 
committed  to  the  care  and  protection  of  their  parents  without  apprehending  any  material 
or  extended  abuse.  But  among  people  broken  down  by  poverty,  or  brutalized  by  vice, 
the  moral  affections  become  cold  and  dull ;  and  there  are  multitudes  of  wretches  who, 
for  bread  or  gin,  are  ready  to  sell  their  children  to  any  kind  of  misery.  The  victims 
immured  in  these  mines  prove  the  fact ;  and  in  further  confirmation  of  it  one  might  adduce 

the 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  l6l 

the  wretched  little  slaves  of  chimney-sweepers,  a  numerous  class  of  beings  most  infamously 
oppressed,  whom  it  is  not  too  serious  to  call  a  reproach  to  the  country.  The  law  will  not 
allow  a  man  to  starve  his  child  or  to  flog  it  to  death,  but  he  may  cast  it  from  his  care  with 
impunity,  and  devote  it  to  a  servitude,  that  does  cruel  violence  to  its  nature — either  sends 
it  to  an  early  grave,  or,  if  it  lives,  leaves  it  to  struggle  with  the  torments  of  an  enfeebled 
constitution.  Surely  some  legislative  interference  is  required  to  restrain  so  barbarous  and 
unwarrantable  an  exertion  of  power — to  prevent  the  exposure  of  children  to  loathsome  and 
unhealthy  occupations,  at  least  till  they  are  of  an  age  to  give  their  consent.  The  cries  of 
the  little  beings  condemned  to  the  mines  have  never,  I  imagine,  reached  the  ears  of  their 
noble  proprietor ;  and  if  he  should  hear  of  their  condition  through  my  means,  and  secure 
their  release,  I  shall  have  been  accessary  to  an  act  of  charity  that  I  shall  remember  with 
pleasure  through  life. 

I  pursued  my  journey  from  Whitehaven  alone,  my  friend's  time  being  too  valuable  to 
him  to  permit  him  to  make  such  frequent  and  long  pauses  as  my  more  multifarious  concerns 
made  it  necessary  for  me  to  do.  On  leaving  this  town  my  chief  subject  of  attention  was 
still  the  collieries,  which  give  quite  a  character  to  the  country  :  for  many  miles  to  the 
northward  the  eye  is  caught  by  the  vast  chimneys  of  the  steam-engines  sending  forth 
clouds  of  black  smoke ;  roads  black  with  coal-dust  lead  to  the  various  towns  which  are 
planted  on  the  coast ;  files  of  coal-waggons  are  continually  passing  and  repassing,  and 
almost  every  person  that  one  meets,  shews,  in  his  black  figure,  that  coals  here  make  up 
the  grand  business  of  life.  The  country  is  exceedingly  populous ;  four  considerable  towns 
occurring  on  the  coast  within  an  interval  often  or  twelve  miles,  besides  many  villages  and 
hamlets.  The  appearance  of  the  coast,  enlivened  by  this  great  shew  of  human  art  and 
industry,  is  very  striking,  as  viewed  at  some  distance  from  sea.  It  forms  a  very  beautiful 
line,  being  broken  into  a  series  of  small  bays,  in  each  of  which  stands  a  town,  with 
its  harbour  and  thick  cluster  of  masts  in  front,  and  backed  immediately  by  gentle  and 
cultivated  hills,  behind  which,  in  the  distance,  appear  the  dark  summits  of  the  mountains. 

Separated  from  the  bay  of  Whitehaven  by  a  rocky  headland,  is  the  large  village  of 
Parton,  situated  in  a  remarkably  pretty  bay.  This  place  had  once  a  great  number  of 
vessels  belonging  to  it,  and  divided  the  business  of  the  collieries  with  Whitehaven ;  but 
about  eighteen  years  ago  its  harbour  was  totally  destroyed  by  an  irruption  of  the  sea,  and 
since  that  period  it  has  afforded  shelter  only  to  fishermen.  An  extraordinary  high  tide 
was  the  cause  of  this  violent  invasion,  and  such  another,  accompanied  by  a  western  gale, 
would  probably  sweep  away  the  whole  village,  which  stands  at  the  very  edge  of  the  sea, 
with  no  protection  but  a  natural  beach.  It  is  a  very  neat  village,  and,  with  the  scenery 
about  it,  presents  a  very  pleasing  subject  for  the  eye  of  a  painter.  The  bay  is  of  a  semi, 
lunar  figure,  with  masses  of  broken  rock  at  the  points,  and  the  village  at  the  water's  edge 
in  the  centre,  closely  bound  in  by  a  smooth  green  hill,  with  a  little  wood  at  its  base.  I 
was  here  on  a  delightful  day,  when  there  were  no  signs  to  encourage  anticipations  of  wreck 
VOL.  II.  y  and 


102  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  ruin.  The  bay  was  filled  with  a  calm  blue  sea,  without  noise  or  motion,  except  where 
it  sparkled  in  a  line  of  silvery  foam  along  the  shore.  A  fleet  of  herring  boats  lay  at  anchor 
before  the  village,  and  groups  of  fishermen  were  loitering  about,  booted  for  sea,  but  delayed 
by  the  calm. 

Not  far  from  Parton,  in  the  adjoining  parish  of  Moresby,  and  close  to  the  church,  are 
the  traces  of  a  Roman  encampment,  an  earth-work  enclosing  a  square  of  several  acres. 
Roman  remains  in  this  country  afford  but  little  matter  for  description,  and  the  obvious 
reflections  that  spring  from  a  sight  of  them  have  been  too  often  committed  to  book  to  be 
tolerated  again  in  print.  The  north-western  coast  of  England  being  exposed  to  the  incur- 
sions of  the  Caledonians,  was  guarded  with  peculiar  care  by  our  ancient  conquerors,  and  a 
regular  series  of  their  fortifications  may  still  be  traced  from  the  Solway  Firth  to  Lancaster. 
Aware  that  all  of  them  had  been  subjected  to  the  keen  observation  of  more  experienced 
and  industrious  antiquaries  than  myself,  I  passed  by  them  without  troubling  myself  about 
taking  elevations  and  measuring  paces,  content  to  look  at  them  only  as  the  sources  of  a 
little  moralizing  melancholy. 

North  of  Moresby  commence  the  collieries  of  Mr.  Curwen,  whose  works  are  almost 
as  extensive  as  those  of  Lord  Lonsdale,  and  who  is  the  sole  shipper  of  coals  from  the  ports 
of  Harrington  and  Workington.  This  great  staple  commodity  of  the  country  continued, 
in  spite  of  myself,  to  form  the  staple  subject  of  my  thoughts.  After  quitting  the  Roman 
encampment  I  soon  found  myself  on  an  iron  rail-road,  which  runs  down  a  gentle  declivity 
for  about  a  mile  and  a  half,  when  it  terminates  in  a  low  steep  bank  over  the  harbour  of 
Harrington,  from  whence  the  coals  are  precipitated  by  hurries  into  the  vessels.  Harrington 
very  nearly  resembles  Parton  in  situation,  and  seems  almost  equally  exposed  to  the  danger 
of  destruction,  whenever  a  high  tide  or  a  gale  from  the  west  shall  raise  the  might  of  the 
sea.  I  found  little  in  it  to  detain  me,  the  town  being  just  such  a  one  as  it  may  be  supposed 
colliers,  publicans,  and  seamen  love  to  dwell  in ;  and  its  business  being,  in  all  its  modes  and 
contrivances,  only  a  repetition  of  what  I  had  studiously  observed  at  Whitehaven.  It  has 
a  good  harbour,  defended  by  a  stone  pier  from  the  south  and  west  sea,  within  which  a 
narrow  passage  between  two  wooden  jutties  leads  into  an  enclosed  basin,  where  vessels 
lie  in  perfect  security,  and  receive  their  lading  in  all  weathers.  The  port  musters  sixty- 
four  vessels,  bearing  a  burthen  of  7,388  tons.  Six  of  these,  carrying  1,076  tons,  are 
employed  in  foreign  commerce,  and  the  remainder  in  the  exportation  of  coals. 

I  proceeded  from  town  to  town  on  this  populous  coast  with  more  than  ordinary 
despatch,  as  little  occurred  in  the  scenery  of  the  country  to  detain  me,  and  the  towns 
themselves  having  one  common  origin  and  pursuit,  were  all  alike.  I  was  now  receding 
fast  from  the  mountains,  which  no  longer  appeared  in  a  continued  and  extended  range, 
but  scattered  in  insulated  masses  along  the  horizon.  Near  the  sea,  the  country  preserved 
a  great  sameness  of  character,  consisting  of  a  range  of  round  wavy  hills,  rarely  broken  by 
any  deep  valleys  or  glens,  and  somewhat  tiresome  to  the  eye  from  the  unvaried  smoothness 

and 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  IfJS 

and  uniformity  of  their  surfaces.  Not  a  tree  appeared  to  interrupt  the  evenness  of  this 
monotonous  landscape,  which  still  however  atoned  for  its  barrenness  in  the  picturesque,  by 
an  abundant  display  of  corn — a  kind  of  fruitfulness  far  more  interesting  to  the  multitudes 
that  people  the  coast. 

To  the  northward  of  the  small  bay  of  Parton,  the  coast  becomes  less  bold  and  rugged, 
the  cliffs  of  rock  giving  way  to  a  green,  shelving  bank,  at  the  base  of  which  is  a  narrow 
stripe  of  flat  land  gradually  wasting  away  before  the  advancing  sea.  On  one  side  of 
Harrington  this  bank  rises  almost  perpendicularly  to  the  height  of  fifty  or  sixty  feet,  with 
a  smooth  front,  which  seems  to  have  been  cut  and  planed  by  art,  for  the  purpose  probably 
of  rendering  it  inaccessible  to  an  invading  enemy.  Our  Scottish  neighbours  kept  the 
inhabitants  of  this  border  country  on  the  perpetual  alarm,  and  many  a  guarded  hill  and 
headland  remain  as  memorials  of  their  hostility.  About  a  mile  and  a  half  farther  north, 
on  the  summit  of  a  steep  hill,  called  Chapel  Holm,  are  the  remains  of  a  small  square 
tower,  designed  in  ancient  times  as  a  watch-tower.  The  name  of  the  hill  should  signify 
that  it  was  sacred  to  a  different  object,  but  the  building  now  to  be  seen  upon  it  has  the 
character  of  a  military  and  not  a  religious  work.  From  its  summit  I  had  a  good  view  of 
Workington,  a  long  narrow  town  stretched  along  an  elevated  ridge  of  land  above  the 
Derwent — the  mingling  masts  and  ropes  of  vessels  continuing  the  line  to  the  sea. 

On  descending  from  this  hill,  I  was  surprised  at  the  sight  of  two  coal  pits,  with  their 
steam-engines,  at  the  brink  of  the  sea.  They  are  very  conveniently  situated  for  the  con- 
veyance of  the  coals  to  the  harbour  of  Workington,  but  it  was  a  bold  experiment  to  sink 
them  on  a  shore  so  exposed  to  the  inroads  of  the  sea.  One  of  them  is  protected  by  a 
wall,  though  very  imperfectly,  for  the  sea  is  working  its  way  round  it,  and  on  the  occur- 
rence of  one  of  those  overwhelming  tides  which  occasionally  commit  such  ravages  on  the 
coast,  nothing  could  save  the  pit  from  inundation. 

A  few  hundred  yards  north  of  these  pits,  the  river  Derwent  discharges  itself  into  the 
sea,  forming  a  spacious  and  secure  harbour  at  its  mouth,  but,  like  most  harbours  at  the 
mouths  of  rivers,  rendered  difficult  of  access  by  shifting  sands.  A  dreary  waste  of  swampy 
land  surrounds  the  harbour,  but  about  half  a  mile  up,  it  contracts  into  a  pretty  green 
valley,  bounded  by  steep  wooded  banks,  and  watered  by  the  river  which  winds  from  side 
to  side,  sparkling  and  murmuring  over  a  pebbly  bed.  On  the  south  bank  stands  the  town 
of  Workington,  set  off  at  one  extremity  by  Workiugton  Hall,  the  seat  of  Mr.  Curwen,  a 
handsome  castellated  mansion,  screened  by  a  fine  grove,  above  which  appear  the  blue 
summits  of  distant  mountains. 

I  found  the  town  in  a  state  of  extreme  bustle  and  agitation,  in  consequence  of  the 
late  arrival  of  a  troop  of  soldiers,  whose  presence  was  thought  necessary  to  quell  a  spirit  of 
discontent  and  riot  that  had  for  some  time  shewn  itself  among  Mr.  Curw^n's  miners,  and 
lately  broken  out  into  some  acts  of  violence.  The  dispute  was  amongst  themselves  solely, 
and  originated,  it  was  said,  in  the  turbulence  of  a  party  of  Irish  labourers,  though  from  all  I 

Y  2  could 


164  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

could  collect,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  this  turbulence  was  excited  by  the  insolence 
and  domineering  disposition  of  the  English  party  in  the  mines.  Mr.  Cunven  employs  a 
great  number  of  Irish,  much  to  the  dissatisfaction  of  his  English  workmen,  who  protest 
against  them  generally  as  foreigners  and  papists,  and  are  particularly  irritated  against 
them  for  sneakingly  submitting  to  receive  such  wages  as  they  can  procure.  The  un- 
fortunate Irish  thus  offending  are  subject  to  a  system  of  petty  persecution,  and  taunted 
and  reviled  till  they  can  bear  no  more,  and  rise  against  their  oppressors  according  to  the 
custom  of  their  country  with  clubs  in  their  hands — a  scuffle  ensues,  and  some  heads  are 
broken,  when  it  is  thought  prudent  to  send  for  soldiers,  who  overawe  them  at  once,  and 
terrify  them  into  order.  But  it  is  not  soldiers  who  can  effectually  pacify  these  poor 
people,  for  it  is  not  the  sword  that  can  enlighten  their  minds,  soften  their  manners,  and 
redress  their  wrongs.  These  limited  squabbles  result  from  the  same  causes  that  spread 
discontent  and  confusion  all  over  Ireland.  In  their  own  country,  the  Irish  are  the  wildest 
and  most  disorderly  people  of  civilized  Europe,  and  amongst  whatever  strangers  they 
settle  there  is  an  end  of  all  quietness  and  subordination — nor  can  it  be  expected  to  be 
otherwise  till  something  is  do  e  towards  the  amelioration  of  their  condition,  and  the 
assimilation  of  their  laws  and  rights  to  those  of  the  parent  country.  They  come  over  here 
a  race  of  uncultivated  savages,  prepared  for  riot  by  the  natural  heat  of  their  tempers,  and 
a  just  sense  of  their  injuries :  abject  and  poverty-stricken  in  their  appearance,  they  find 
themselves  exposed  to  contemptuous  usage  wherever  they  go;  treated  like  dogs  by  a  people 
to  whom  by  right  of  a  community  in  laws  and  government  they  feel  they  ought  to  be  equal — 
and  can  it  be  wondered  at,  if  thus  insulted  and  exasperated,  they  become  desperate  and 
ferocious  ?  Soldiers  may  check  their  excesses  and  beat  them  down,  but  if  we  wish  to  see 
them  tamed,  we  must  have  recourse  to  more  conciliating  modes  of  discipline— educate 
them,  redeem  them  from  oppression — subject  them  to  an  efficient  and  impartial  magistracy, 
and  give  them  an  interest  and  a  pride  in  supporting  a  constitution  which  respects  their 
welfare  and  happiness. 

Workington  is  a  long,  straggling,  incompact  town, — dirty  enough,  I  could  not  help 
thinking,  but  clean,  it  is  said,  for  a  coal  town.  It  contains  between  thirteen  and  fourteen 
thousand  inhabitants.  During  half  an  hour's  ramble,  I  saw  every  thing  in  it  that  could 
possibly  be  thought  worth  seeing,  and  nothing  that  it  is  worth  while  to  talk  about  here. 
The  quantity  of  coals  shipped  at  this  place  is  not  much  less  than  at  Whitehaven.  Two 
hundred  vessels,  of  27,899  tons  burthen,  belong  to  the  port,  all  colliers,  excepting  a  few 
employed  in  the  North  American  and  Baltic  trades. 

Somewhat  less  than-a  mile  above  its  mouth,  the  Derwent  is  crossed  by  a  handsome 
stone  bridge  of  three  arches,  from  whence  the  town,  or  a  part  of  it,  is  seen  to  the  best 
advantage,  crowning  a  bold  eminence,  with  a  fertile  valley  beneath  it.  The  valley  has 
apparently  been  at  some  period  the  bed  of  a  stream  of  water,  having  a  surface  as  flat  as  a 
bowling  green,  and  Avinding  between  high,  steep  banks,  like  a  river.  Probably  the  sea 

flowed 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BKITAIN.  165 

flowed  into  it  till  blocked  out  by  depositions  of  sand  brought  down  by  the  Derwent. 
This  conjecture  is  rendered  plausible  by  the  appearance  of  the  coast  to  the  northward  of 
the  river,  from  whence  the  sea  has  evidently  retired  considerably  at  no  very  remote 
period,  though  now  again  advancing-.  A  flat  sandy  tract  extends  for  two  or  three  miles 
along  the  shore,  covered  generally  with  heath  or  sea-bent,  but  naked  in  parts,  and  dis- 
covering beds  of  pebbles  and  shells.  It  is  flanked  in  its  whole  length  by  a  high  precipitous 
bank,  distant  now  more  than  half  a  mile  from  the  sea,  though  once  obviously  its  boundary. 
The  flat  is  not  susceptible  of  cultivation,  but  is  valuable  as  a  rabbit-warren. 

On  leaving  Workington,  my  way  was  enlivened  by  the  crowds  of  people  whom  I  met, 
the  Sabbath  having  given  to  the  miners  a  day  of  respite  from  their  dismal  imprisonment 
under  ground,  and  permitting  them,  with  light  hearts  and  clean  faces,  to  enjoy  the 
common  benefits  of  nature, — the  sunshine  and  the  pure  air.  An  old  miner,  with  whom  I 
entered  into  conversation,  informed  rne,  that  he  felt  himself  on  a  Sunday  a  being  quite  of 
a  distinct  nature  from  the  creature  that  he  was  reduced  to  on  work-days,  and  I  could  readily 
believe  him,  seeing  that  it  was  nn  a  Sunday  only  that  half  his  senses  were  not  useless  and 
inert,  and  the  rest  exercised  only  to  be  pained  and  disgusted.  How  fortunate  it  is  for  the 
proprietors  of  mines  and  the  consumers  of  coals,  that  men  can  be  found  willing  to  submit 
to  any  sacrifices  and  mortifications  for  a  little  more  than  they  could  earn  by  ordinary 
labour — giving  up  in  the  pursuit  of  gain  every  comfort  that  should  constitute  its  reward, 
and  denying  themselves  enjoyments  that  are  open  to  all,  and  more  delightful  than  any 
that  money  can  purchase.  Two-thirds  of  mankind  must  labour  with  no  benefit  but  the 
bare  support  of  life;  but  thousands,  like  these  poor  miners,  are  content  to  live  by  means 
that  poison  all  the  pleasures  of  life,  and  cut  short  half  of  its  duration. 

I  had  little  satisfaction  in  my  day's  walk  but  what  I  derived  in  common  with  the 
miners  from  the  beauty  and  cheerfulness  of  a  fine  summer's  day,  the  coast  presenting 
nothing  to  gratify  attention.  To  the  northward  of  the  Derwent,  the  country  became  less 
elevated,  and  being  distributed  into  inclosures  and  diversified  by  hedge-rows,  had  a  more 
agreeable  aspect  than  the  broad,  bare  hills  that  my  eyes  had  so  long  rested  upon,  though 
still  exhibiting  nothing  but  tame  and  common-place  scenery.  A  border  of  flat  land  continues 
along  the  shore  as  far  as  Maryport,  where  a  branch  from  the  range  of  hills  juts  out  nearly  into 
the  sea,  terminating  with  a  very  bold  and  abrupt  declivity.  The  largest  and  most  respect- 
able part  of  the  town  of  Maryport  is  very  pleasantly  situated  on  the  high  ground,  beneath 
which  are  a  few  streets  on  a  flat  bordering  the  harbour  at  the  mouth  of  the  small  river 
Ellen.  This  place  has  risen  up  entirely  within  the  last  sixty  years,  supported  by  the  coal 
trade,  and  now  contains  full  five  thousand  inhabitants.  The  upper  town  is  well  built,  and 
regularly  laid  out,  the  houses  neat,  and  the  streets  airy  and  spacious;  but  the  lower 
division  is  as  wretched  as  may  be,  betraying  a  condition  of  more  shabbiness  and  filthiness 
than  one  should  have  supposed  it  could  have  fallen  into  in  half  a  century.  The  town  has 
no  concern  in  any  manufactures,  owing  its  subsistence  altogether  to  the  mines.  An 

attempt 


166"  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

attempt  was  made  a  few  years  ago  to  introduce  the  manufacture  of  cotton,  and  a  large  fac- 
tory was  raised,  the  first  seen  in  this  part  of  the  country;  but  the  building  now  stands  with 
broken  windows,  empty  and  deserted,  a  melancholy  memorial  of  the  badness  of  the  times. 

The  harbour  of  Maryport  is  very  small,  and  ill-suited  to  the  wealth  and  commercial 
importance  of  the  place.  The  channel  is  so  narrow  in  parts,  that  two  vessels  can  scarcely 
lie  in  it  abreast ;  and  the  ship-builders  are  obliged  to  launch  their  vessels  into  the  water 
sideways.  It  is  protected  against  the  swell  of  the  sea  by  two  wooden  breakwaters,  con- 
structed at  the  entrance,  which  shew  by  various  gaps  and  fractures  the  power  of  the  body  that 
they  have  to  withstand,  and  the  insufficiency  of  the  materials  of  which  they  are  composed. 
Violent  remonstrances  have  been  made  to  the  lord  of  the  manor  by  the  ship-owners 
concerning  the  inconvenience  and  insecurity  of  the  harbour,  but  he  has  not  attended  to 
them,  and  some  of  them  have  consequently  deserted  the  port.  I  heard  but  a  whisper  of 
these  matters,  and  cannot  pretend  to  decide  between  the  parties.  Mr.  Senhouse  is 
lord  of  the  manor,  and  the  sole  shipper  of  coals  from  Maryport,  and  it  is  certainly  not 
very  probable  that  he  would  refusp  to  comply  with  any  reasonable  requisitions,  so  much 
involving  his  own  interest. 

The  port  has  an  hundred  and  forty-three  vessels,  of  16,840  tons  burthen,  belonging  to 
it;  twenty-one  of  which,  bearing  4125  tons,  are  employed  in  the  West  Indian,  North 
American,  and  Baltic  trades,  but  do  not  return  with  their  cargoes  to  Maryport.  There  is 
depth  of  water  sufficient  in  the  harbour  in  spring  tides  for  a  vessel  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
tons ;  but  one  of  that  burthen  would  scarcely  venture  to  approach  it  in  its  present  con- 
dition, except  in  the  very  finest  weather. 

Maryport  derives  some  dignity  and  interest  from  its  situation  close  to  a  Roman 
station,  the  Volantium  of  ancient  geographers,  though  there  are  doubts  concerning  the 
correctness  of  this  name — playthings  for  more  punctilious  antiquarians  than  myself.  The 
spot  was  judiciously  chosen,  combining  many  natural  advantages  to  recommend  it  as  a  mili- 
tary post.  The  town  is  flanked  on  the  south  side  by  a  lofty  hill  called  the  Castle  Hill,  which 
stands  detached,  and  rises  abruptly  on  all  sides.  There  are  no  remains  of  any  building  upon 
it,  but  an  artificial  mount  has  been  raised  upon  it,  guarded  by  a  wide  and  deep  fosse  at  the 
base.  The  area  of  the  summit  is  about  an  hundred  yards  in  circumference,  and  divided 
into  two  parts  by  a  trench.  It  commands  the  harbour,  and  an  extensive  view  along  the 
coast  and  over  the  country.  Whether  this  simple  fortification  was  the  work  of  the 
Romans,  I  cannot  say,  and  I  know  not  that  any  one  else  has  said ;  but  on  the  high  ground 
to  the  northward  of  the  town  there  is  indisputably  a  Roman  encampment,  and  more 
distinctly  marked  than  any  that  I  have  ever  seen.  It  is  a  square  inclosure,  alx>ut  eighty 
yards  in  diameter,  surrounded  by  a  low  bank  and  a  ditch.  The  bank  is  now  covered  with 
earth  and  grass,  but  is  strengthened,  I  believe,  by  a  foundation  of  stones.  There  is  an 
entrance  to  each  front,  in  one  of  which  some  walling  is  discovered,  the  stones  of  which  are 
of  great  ske,  and  laid  together  without  cement,  but  squared  and  smoothed,  and  very  nicely 

and 


Mary  Port,  Cumberland 


Carlaverock  Castle,  Dumfrieshire 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  16? 

and  regularly  arranged.  There  are  no  traces  of  any  regular  building  within  the  enclosed 
space,  but  it  is  covered  with  heaps  of  stones  recently  dug  up,  amongst  which  a  rich  store 
of  curious  remains  was  discovered.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  this  interesting  ground  has 
been  opened  in  a  very  coarse  and  bungling  manner — witli  as  little  care  for  consequences 
as  is  manifested  by  a  school-boy  when  he  breaks  his  toy  to  pieces  with  a  puerile  curiosity 
to  see  what  it  is  made  of.  It  was  not  an  Herculaneum  or  a  Pompeii  that  was  to  be 
brought  to  light,  but  it  was  something  at  least  which  was  the  work  of  the  same  illustrious 
people,  equally  venerable  on  the  score  of  antiquity,  and  particularly  recommended  to  our 
estimation  from  its  creation  in  our  own  soil.  No  extraordinary  caution  was  required  in 
removing  the  earth  and  extricating  the  ruins,  but  the  little  that  was  necessary  was  not 
bestowed,  the  business  having  been  submitted  to  the  pickaxe  of  a  common  labourer,  who 
rooted  up  altars  and  columns  with  no  consideration,  as  was  natural  enough,  for  their  value, 
or  the  injury  that  they  might  suffer  under  his  rough  hands. 

Most  of  the  remains  are  deposited  at  Nether  Hall,  the  seat  of  Mr.  Senhouse,  about 
a  mile  to  the  east  of  Maryport.  The  house  was  undergoing  some  repairs  and  alterations 
when  I  was  there,  and  the  fragments  of  Roman  art  lay  tumbled  about  the  premises;  altars 
and  inscribed  tablets,  and  scraps  of  sculpture,  mixed  in  singular  confusion  with  stones  and 
mortar  and  other  litter  of  modern  masonry.  Pennant  has  prevented  the  necessity  of  my 
giving  any  particular  description  of  the  remains.  They  consist  principally  of  altars  and 
tables  of  stone,  some  square  and  some  columnar,  with  inscriptions,  all  composed  of  white 
freestone.  I  noticed  some  rude  efforts  in  sculpture,  representations  of  men  on  horseback, 
resembling,  in  point  of  truth  of  design,  the  figures  which  one  sees  cut  on  the  benches  in 
public  walks.  These  were  probably  done  by  the  common  soldiers ;  and  who  could  look 
at  them  without  interest,  on  adverting  to  the  state  of  this  country  when  these  trivial  works 
were  first  left  in  it,  to  their  living  down  to  this  distant  age,  and  being  brought  to  light  at 
this  period  of  our  grandeur  and  power,  to  be  contemplated  like  the  most  magnificent 
works  of  their  genius  and  industry,  as  the  memorials  of  a  people  who  live  only  in  history ! 
Some  of  the  altars  are  of  very  elegant  forms,  and  there  are  some  specimens  of  sculpture 
of  a  better  kind  than  those  which  I  have  just  mentioned  :  I  remarked  particularly  a  war- 
rior on  horseback  trampling  on  a  fallen  enemy,  slightly  finished,  but  with  spirit  and  con- 
siderable force  of  effect.  Though  none  of  these  works  give  us  any  idea  of  Roman  art  in 
its  highest  style  of  excellence,  yet  they  must  surely  be  regarded  as  valuable  relics,  and 
are  worthy  of  being  carefully  preserved.  The  British  Museum  opens  its  cabinets  to 
curiosities  of  a  less  interesting  description,  and  might  spare  a  corner  for  some  of  these 
slighted  remains  without  any  violence  to  the  purposes  of  its  institution. 

On  leaving  Maryport  and  coming  to  the  termination  of  the  lofty  bank  that  extends 
for  about  a  mile  to  the  northward  of  it,  a  beautiful  and  extensive  prospect  opened  upon 
me,  the  coast  receding  into  a  pretty  semicircular  bay,  bordered  by  a  level  and  well  culti- 
vated country,  and  bounded  at  its  farthest  point  by  the  white  village  of  Allonby,  with  the 

bold 


168  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

bold  hills  of  Galloway  in  the  distance  behind  it.  As  I  proceeded  to  the  northward,  the 
inland  country  still  continued  to  decline  in  height,  and  as  it  rose  in  gentler  undulations 
disclosed  a  deeper  front  of  the  distant  mountains,  amongst  which  the  vast  Skiddaw  rose 
up  with  pre-eminent  majesty.  This  is  the  most  northern  mountain  of  the  Cumberland 
range  distinguishable  from  the  coast,  and  though  not  the  loftiest,  yet  as  it  stands  discon- 
nected and  rises  from  a  narrow  base  abruptly  to  its  summit,  its  height  is  more  distinctly 
and  intelligibly  made  out  to  the  eye,  and  appears  vaster  than  that  of  others  of  equal  or 
superior  elevation.  Its  summit  is  said  to  be  one  thousand  and  ninety  yards  above  the 
level  of  the  sea. 

I  was  now  entering  upon  a  less  populous  and  busy  part  of  the  country  than  I  had 
lately  been  travelling  in,  and  had  turned  rny  back  upon  rail-roads,  waggons,  and  hurries, 
and  all  their  noise  and  dirt.  There  are  no  collieries  to  the  northward  of  Maryport,  and 
no  town  or  harbour  between  it  and  the  Solway  Firth.  Allonby  is  a  small  watering-place, 
whose  silence  and  dulness  offered  as  strong  a  contrast  as  possible  to  the  bustle  and  ac- 
tivity of  the  busy  towns  that  I  had  just  come  from.  I  did  not  remain  long  enough  in  it 
to  find  out  any  thing  to  say  about  it,  and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  those  who  had 
survived  a  month's  residence  there  were  not  much  more  amply  stored. 

I  had  a  dull  ride  from  this  place  to  Skinburness,  through  a  naked  and  dreary  country, 
not  unfruitful  generally  in  corn,  but  interrupted  towards  the  sea  by  moors. and  tracts  of 
sand,  and  extending  inland  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  in  an  unbroken  flat.  It  is 
bounded  along  the  shore  by  a  long  range  of  sand  hills  spreading  out  in  places  over  a  con- 
siderable extent  of  ground,  and  thrown  up  to  a  great  height,  and  in  very  bold  and  pic- 
turesque groups.  The  sand  is  often  blown  over  the  country  by  the  western  gales  with  great 
injury  to  vegetation,  but  it  is  in  some  degree  held  together  by  the  elymus  arenarius  and 
the  arundo  arenaria;  which  plants  branch  out  at  the  roots  into  numerous  creeping  fibres, 
but  they  rise  above  the  ground  in  single  stems  like  rushes,  thinly  scattered,  and  leaving  the 
surface  of  the  sand  loose  and  uncovered.  The  dog-rose,  which  grows  well  in  sand,  is 
better  calculated  for  the  protection  of  the  surface,  but  its  roots  do  not  strike  down  to  such 
a  depth,  or  spread  so  widely.  A  combination  of  the  plants  with  these  opposite  recom- 
mendations occurs  at  once  to  one  as  a  plausible  expedient,  but  as  it  has  not  been  tried 
by  those  much  interested  in  the  result  of  such  an  experiment,  I  imagine  that  they  will  not 
grow  amicably  together.  The  coast  swarms  with  rabbits,  which  thrive  well  enough  on  the 
little  food  that  they  can  pick  from  this  barren  soil,  and  yield  some  compensation  to  the 
owners  of  the  land  for  the  scantiness  of  its  vegetable  produce.  Beyond  Allonby  they 
appeared  in  amazing  numbers,  covering  the  ground  on  each  side  of  the  road  like  flocks  of 
sea-fowl.  I  was  amused  by  their  motions  and  the  various  degrees  of  boldness  or  timidity 
that  they  manifested  as  I  approached  tm.  Sometimes  a  whole  flock  would  remain 
quite  steady  and  stationary  till  1  was  within  a  few  yards  of  them,  when  another  step 
seemed  to  be  felt  by  them  all  like  a  wound,  and  they  vanished  as  quick  as  lightning. 

Few 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GIIEAT    BRITAIN.  169 

Few  animals,  in  a  short  trial,  are  more  rapid  in  their  action,  or,  if  they  have  fair  play, — are 
pursued,  I  mean,  in  an  honourable  and  sportsman-like  manner, — are  caught  with  greater 
difficulty.  A  man  with  a  gun  might  hope  to  make  great  havoc  among  them  here,  but 
he  would  find  the  sport  very  tantalizing,  and  rarely  touch  a  rabbit  out  of  the  numbers 
that  he  would  see  popping  in  and  out  of  their  holes  all  round  him. 

Near  Skinburness  I  was  gratified  by  the  disclosure  of  a  more  beautiful  and  animating 
prospect,  the  great  expanse  of  the  Solway  Firth,  and  almost  the  whole  southern  border  of 
Scotland,  stretching  out  far  into  the  western  sea  in  a  range  of  bold  spiry  hills,  and  along 
the  shore  of  the  Firth  spotted  with  villages  and  farms,  amidst  meadows  and  corn  fields, — 
the  sea  and  the  variegated  surface  of  the  wide  expanded  landscape  all  glowing  under  the 
golden  light  of  the  evening  sun.  Had  I  been  a  Scotchman  I  should  certainly  have  felt 
my  heart  leap  within  me  at  such  an  exhibition  of  my  country ;  and  with  no  such  right  of 
exultation,  I  was  not  a  little  delighted  with  its  beauty  and  the  splendour  of  its  effect. 

I  stopped  at  Skinburness  where  a  guide  resides  who  conducts  passengers  over  the 
Wampool  sands.  He  keeps  one  horse  for  this  purpose,  which  he  finds  sufficient  for  a 
small  party,  and  as  much  as  his  profits  can  enable  him  to  support.  Taking  my  place, 
according  to  rule,  behind  him,  we  set  out  upon  the  journey,  which  he  endeavoured  to 
make  as  interesting  as  possible  by  telling  its  dangers,  particularly  to  those  who  were  fool- 
hardy enough  to  venture  without  a  guide.  The  sands  from  Skinburness  to  Cardonnock 
at  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  which  separates  them  from  the  main  branch  of  the 
Solway  Firth,  are  about  three  miles  across,  and  intersected  by  two  rivers,  the  Waver  and 
the  Wampool,  neither  of  them  more  than  three  or  four  feet  deep,  but  so  rapid  that  a  man 
might  find  it  difficult  to  keep  his  feet  in  fording  them.  In  the  winter  time  these  sands 
are  sometimes  covered  with  dangerous  spots  occasioned  by  the  snow :  during  neap  tides 
a  great  part  of  them  is  left  dry,  and  the  snow  lying  in  heaps  upon  them  for  several  days 
sinks  deep  holes  into  them,  which  on  the  coming  of  the  first  spring  tide  are  filled  up  with 
quick-sands,  and  present  formidable  traps  to  passengers.  On  crossing  the  Wampool  our 
horse,  well  trained  to  the  business,  lay  almost  on  his  side  to  resist  the  violence  of  the 
stream,  which  rushed  furiously  down,  and  seemed  to  my  eye  to  sweep  us  along  with  it. 
The  posture  of  the  horse  as  he  laboured,  with  two  people  upon  his  back,  through  this  roar- 
ing flood,  looked  really  alarming,  and  I  did  not  give  up  my  expectations  of  being  cast 
headlong  into  the  water,  till  I  felt  the  animal  again  straight  upon  his  legs.  We  crossed 
during  the  ebb,  the  most  dangerous  time,  as,  in  case  of  a  fall,  the  current  would  every 
instant  keep  hurrying  you  into  deeper  water. 

I  dismounted  immediately  that  we  were  out  of  the  Wampool,  having  received  my 
lawful  six-penn'orth,  and  soon  made  good  my  landing  on  the  firm  ground,  near  Cardon- 
nock, a  beautiful  village,  and  very  singularly  situated.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  flat 
peninsula,  lying  between  the  Wampool  and  the  Solway  Firth,  is  a  desolate  peat-moss ; 
but  near  its  extreme  point  at  Cardonnock  there  is  a  small  tract,  about  two  miles  in  cir- 

VOL.  ii.  z  cumference, 


170  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

cumference,  of  extraordinary  fertility,  that  smiles  like  a  garden  in  the  desert,  contrasting 
with  its  unvaried  barrenness  the  mingling  beauties  of  corn-fields,  and  meadows,  and 
woods.  The  inhabitants  of  this  select  spot  being  shut  out  from  any  ready  communication 
with  the  world  beyond  them,  by  a  waste  of  sand  on  one  side  of  their  domains,  and  a 
trackless  bog  on  another,  are  looked  upon  like  foreigners  pent  up  in  an  island  of  their 
own,  and  they  are  said  to  be  distinguished  by  some  slight  peculiarities  in  their  manners 
and  customs,  and  a  great  love  of  their  little  land.  My  Skinburness  guide  observed  on 
our  passage,  pointing  to  the  clustering  trees  that  rose  above  the  dreary  sands  and  marked 
their  pleasant  abode, — '  there  is  not  a  happier  or  a  better  fed  set  of  people  to  be  found 
than  the  Cardonnockers.'  They  are  little  indebted  to  foreign  supplies  for  any  of  the  neces- 
saries or  luxuries  of  life.  The  moss  on  their  northern  and  eastern  frontiers  furnishes  them 
with  fuel ;  the  Solway  that  washes  their  southern  and  western  shores  gives  them  fish  in 
abundance;  and  the  rich  fields  of  the  interior  yield  them  food  of  every  sort  that  the  stomach 
of  man  can  reasonably  require. 

I  loitered  here  till  the  setting  sun  warned  me  that  I  was  not  a  Cardonnocker,  and 
must  travel  further  before  I  could  rest  for  the  night.  I  found  a  tolerable  path  along  the 
shore  of  the  Firth,  and  walked  for  several  miles  with  a  waste  of  wet  sand  to  my  left,  and  the 
moss  spread  out  in  boundless  barrenness  to  my  right.  A  part  of  this  moss  has  been  lately 
reclaimed,  but  it  is  still  of  vast  extent.  A  great  quantity  of  timber  is  dug  out  of  it,  some 
of  it  so  fresh  and  sound  that  it  is  used  for  various  purposes  by  carpenters.  The  trees  are 
principally  oak,  bi?ch,  and  fir.  The  revolutions  which  this  barren  tract  has  undergone 
are  thus  recorded  in  a  traditional  couplet,  familiar  in  this  neighbourhood. 

"  Once  a  wood  and  then  a  sea, 
Now  a  moss,  and  still  will  be." 

The  early  part  of  its  history,  as  thus  given,  is  probably  correctly  stated,  and  is  sup- 
ported by  the  opinions  of  geologists  concerning  the  nature  of  peat-mosses  in  general ;  but 
the  last  prophetic  decision,  which  dooms  it  to  perpetual  barrenness,  is  happily  not  likely 
to  be  justified,  and  indeed  has  in  some  degree  been  already  refuted ;  for  a  considerable 
part  of  the  moss  has  been  brought  into  cultivation.  I  walked  for  some  time  with  the 
gratifying  sight  before  me  of  fields  which,  a  very  few  years  ago,  were  a  portion  of  the 
moss,  now  covered  with  crops  of  ripened  corn.  Nearly  in  the  middle  of  the  moss  there 
is  a  curious  eminence,  containing  about  forty  acres  of  land ;  a  pretty  green  spot,  which 
looks  like  an  island  amidst  the  waste.  The  soil  of  this  singular  piece  of  ground  is  clay 
resting  on  a  bed  of  gravel. 

About  five  miles  north-east  of  Cardonnock  the  flat  along  shore  is  interrupted  by  a 
gentle  rising,  on  which,  amongst  pleasant  fields  and  shaded  with  wood,  stands  the  village 
of  Bowness,  where  I  found  very  humble  quarters  for  the  night.  I  was  here  again  in  the 
way  of  Roman  antiquities.  This  village  is  almost  entirely  built  with  stones  taken  from 

the 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BBITAIN.  171 

the  great  Roman  wall  which  was  raised  along  the  northern  frontier  of  our  island,  to  pro- 
tect it  from  the  incursions  of  the  Caledonians.  The  wall  was  faced  with  freestone,  and 
here  and  there  on  the  outer  covering  some  stones  with  inscriptions  and  rude  carving  upon 
them  were  discovered,  and  are  now  to  be  seen  fixed  in  the  walls  of  various  cottages  and 
barns  in  Bowness.  As  I  walked  up  the  village  street  without  expecting  such  things,  I 
was  much  interested  on  casting  my  eyes  upon  the  venerable  characters  of  a  Roman  in- 
scription, scratched  in  a  scrawling  and  clumsy  manner  on  a  small  stone,  now  the  key- 
stone of  an  arch  which  forms  the  door-way  of  a  barn.  The  inscription  ran  thus — 

I  0  M 

PRO  SALUTE 
D.  D.  N.  N.  GALLI 

ET  VOLUSIANI 
AUGG.  SULPICIUS 

SECUNDIAN 

US.  TRIE.  COH. 

POSUJT. 

A  large  table  of  stone  was  shewn  me  in  the  wall  of  a  barn-yard,  with  a  grotesque 
figure  carved  upon  it,  of  a  man,  woman,  or  child,  I  fancy,  though  so  monstrously  carica- 
tured that  I  could  scarcely  conceive  what  it  was  designed  for.  I  was  amused  with  the 
simplicity  of  the  Cicerone  appointed  to  instruct  me  here,  an  honest  countryman,  who  was 
well  acquainted  with  all  the  habitats  of  the  inscriptions,  but  had  not  been  taught  to  feel 
any  reverence  for  them,  and  did  not  see  that  a  few  letters  scratched  by  a  Roman  soldier 
eighteen  centuries  ago  were  at  all  more  interesting  than  if  they  had  been  done  by  his 
next-door  neighbour.  When  he  had  shewn  me  all  the  classical  scraps,  he  led  me  to  the 
door  of  a  stable,  and  pointed  to  a  stone  over  it,  thus  inscribed, — T.  L.  I.  22.  He  fixed 
his  eyes  upon  me,  evidently  enjoying  the  puzzle  into  which  these  mystic  capitals  had 
thrown  me,  till,  with  a  smile,  in  which  pity  for  me  and  pride  in  himself  were  mixed,  he 
relieved  my  ignorance.  "  Thomas  Lawson,  to  be  sure,  Sir,"  said  he,  "  dead  now  some 
twenty  years  ago,  but  as  worthy  a  man  in  his  time  as  ever  lived." 

Severus's  Wall  was  not  carried  farther  to  the  westward  than  Bowness,  and  it 
may  still  be  traced  to  its  eastern  extremity  at  Newcastle,  though  the  line  is  very  often 
interrupted,  the  stones  having  been  removed  in  many  places  to  make  way  for  the  plough. 
It  is  very  distinct  for  an  extent  of  a  mile  or  more  east  of  Bowness,  appearing  in  a  con- 
fused heap  of  stones,  spreading  out  to  much  more  than  the  original  breadth  of  the  wall, 
and  generally  covered  with  earth  and  grass.  It  is  very  rarely  that  any  part  of  the  naked 
wall  is  seen  standing,  though  I  observed  one  fragment  not  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  Bow- 
ness,  which  was  seven  or  eight  feet  high.  It  had  been  entirely  stripped  of  its  facing,  and 

z  2  shewed 


172  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

shewed  a  coarse  mass  of  stone  and  mortar  curiously  mixed  together,  and  consolidated  into 
a  body  of  amazing  hardness.  From  the  manner  in  which  the  cement  encrusts  the  stones, 
it  appears  to  have  been  poured  in  hot  amongst  them. 

Such  a  wall  as  this  seems  to  have  been  but  a  babyish  defence  against  an  enemy,  even 
of  the  weakest  and  most  insignificant  description,  and  little  more  than  sufficient  to  keep 
out  old  women  and  children.  But  we  must  remember  the  nature  of  the  hostility  to  which 
this  country  was  subject  from  the  Caledonians  before  we  venture  to  sneer  at  the  precau- 
tions taken  by  our  illustrious  conquerors  and  protectors.  In  the  time  of  the  Romans,  the 
borders  were  no  doubt  exposed  to  the  same  petty  piratical  incursions  that  they  suffered 
from  till  within  a  recent  period  of  our  history—small  bands  of  armed  men  being  con- 
tinually on  the  watch,  and  pouncing  like  vultures  upon  our  shores  whenever  an  oppor- 
tunity presented  itself  for  their  slaughtering,  burning,  and  robbing  with  impunity.  Now 
a  wall,  though  a  very  ineffectual  barrier  against  a  large  army,  must  have  been  a  sufficient 
defence  against  these  petty  bands,  and  if  it  could  not  altogether  keep  them  out,  would 
remove  the  great  temptation  to  their  attacks,  by  preventing  their  return  with  cattle  or 
any  other  heavy  booty.  That  it  formed  but  a  very  weak  shield  against  the  whole  com- 
bined force  of  the  northern  barbarians  is  evident  from  the  hopeless  condition  to  which  the 
Britons  were  reduced  on  the  departure  of  the  Romans  from  the  island,  when  they  had  no 
defence  but  this  trifling  barrier  against  the  overwhelming  attacks  of  their  savage  enemies. 

The  Solway  Firth  is  fordable  at  Bowness,  the  sea  retiring  from  it  entirely  about  an 
hour  before  low  water,  and  leaving  only  a  small  channel  to  pass,  filled  by  the  united 
streams  of  the  Eden  and  the  Esk  and  several  smaller  rivers.  The  tides  run  with  amazing 
violence  in  the  Firth,  and  together  with  the  sand-banks,  which  puzzle  seamen  by  con- 
tinually shifting,  render  its  navigation  extremely  dangerous.  I  was  told  that  in  a  spring 
tide,  with  a  strong  westerly  wind,  the  sea,  on  the  first  making  of  the  flood,  rushes  over  the 
sands  with  such  velocity,  that  a  man  surprised  by  it  would  not  be  able  to  outrun  it. 
Vessels  of  two  hundred  tons  burden  come  up  as  high  as  Bowness,  where  they  discharge 
their  cargoes  into  flats  of  fifty  or  sixty  tons,  which  can  proceed  as  far  as  the  rivers  have 
any  communication  with  the  tide,  about  eight  miles  higher  up. 

The  Solway  spreads  into  a  vast  opening  at  its  mouth,  but  contracts  east  of  Cardon- 
nock  to  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  breadth,  and  from  thence  runs  twelve  miles  into  the 
country,  branching  at  its  eastern  extremity  into  two  narrow  arms,  the  estuaries  of  the  Esk 
and  the  Eden.  Its  whole  bed,  except  in  the  channels  of  the  various  rivers  that  discharge 
themselves  into  it,  is  dry  at  low  water,  exhibiting  an  immense  plain  of  sand,  once  pro- 
bably cultivated  land,  whose  loss  is  far  more  than  atoned  for  by  the  benefits  derived 
from  the  Firth,  which  penetrates  far  into  the  channels  of  various  rivers,  forming  safe  har- 
bours and  opening  a  ready  communication  for  commerce  into  distant  parts  of  the  country. 

I  continued  my  journey  from  Bowness  along  the  level  border  of  the  Firth,  quite 
charmed  with  the  beauty  of  the  scenery  around  me.  The  Solway,  now  swelled  by  the 

tide, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  173 

tide,  formed  a  noble  river,  filling  numberless  bays  and  creeks  on  either  shore,  and  bounded 
on  each  side  by  a  low  fertile  country,  variegated  like  a  rich  carpet,  with  the  colouring  of 
the  autumnal  vegetation,  and  girded  round  in  the  distance  by  a  vast  amphitheatre  of 
mountains. 

About  four  miles  above  Bowness  I  entered  upon  the  Burgh  Marsh,  covered  with  herds 
of  cattle.  It  is  five  miles  long  and  about  one  and  a  half  broad,  as  flat  as  a  planed  board, 
and  covered  with  a  short  grass  of  the  brightest  verdure.  This  is  a  valuable  tract,  but  is 
unfortunately  suffering  continual  waste  from  the  advances  of  the  sea.  Each  coast  of  the 
Solway,  in  its  whole  length,  shews  manifest  signs  of  injury  from  the  same  enemy,  but  par- 
ticularly this  marsh,  which  is  hollowed  into  a  deep  bay,  with  a  narrow  stripe  of  land  at 
one  point  of  it,  jutting  out  more  than  half  a  mile  into  the  Firth,  and  worn  away  towards 
its  extreme  point  to  a  few  yards  in  breadth. 

Near  the  east  end  of  the  marsh,  and  about  half  a  mile  from  the  sea,  stands  Edward 
the  First's  monument,  erected  on  the  spot  where  he  died,  while  encamped  with  an  army 
collected  for  the  invasion  of  Scotland.  The  original  monument  raised  here  to  his  memory 
fell  to  ruin,  and  the  present  one  was  built  a  few  years  ago  by  Lord  Lonsdale.  It  is  a 
quadrangular  column,  about  thirty  feet  high,  raised  on  a  basement  of  three  steps,  and 
ornamented  on  the  capital  with  four  semicircular  niches,  crowned  with  a  small  pinnacle 
and  cross.  Considering  that  it  is  sacred  to  a  king,  it  is  a  very  mean  unimposing  kind  of 
thing,  and  not  at  all  improved  by  being,  according  to  the  perverse  taste  of  the  county, 
daubed  over  with  whitewash.  There  is  the  following  inscription  upon  it,  copied,  I  sup- 
pose, from  the  original  monument. 

Memoriae  aeternee 

Edvardi  I.  Regis  Angliae  longe 

Clarissimi,  Qui  in  belli  apparatu 

contra  Scotos  occupatus.     Hie 

In  castris  obiit  7-  Julii, 

A.  D.  1307. 

Underneath  this  is  another  inscription  as  follows : — 

Omni  veneratione  prosequens 

Inclytam  Edvardi  Primi  Famam 

Optimi  Angliae  Regis 

Columnam  Hanc 

Humi  fusam  dirutamque 

Hie  reponendam  curavit 

Gulielmus  Vicecomes  De  Lowther, 

Anno  Salutus,  MDCCCIII. 

I  proceeded 


174  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

I  proceeded  as  far  as  the  small  hamlet  of  Sandsfield,in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  ford 
the  river  there;  but  found  the  tide  too  high,  and  would  not  venture  to  let  my  horse  swim 
across  with  me,  as  was  seriously  proposed  to  me  by  a  man  who  had  ridden  with  me  from 
Bowness,  with  some  little  hesitation,  not  on  the  score  of  his  own  safety  or  mine,  but  that 
of  his  horses.  Vessels  of  fifty  or  sixty  tons  come  up  as  high  as  this  place  with  coals,  tim- 
ber, groceries,  &c.  &c.  for  the  town  of  Carlisle,  which  are  conveyed  thither  from  hence  by 
land,  the  river  being  navigable  only  for  a  short  distance  above  this  point.  To  wait  at 
Sandsfield,  with  nothing  to  do  but  to  watch  the  retreat  of  the  water,  was  impossible;  I 
therefore  rode  a  mile  or  two  higher  up,  where  the  Eden,  quite  out  of  the  reach  of  the  tide, 
became  fordable.  I  had  a  glimpse  of  the  towers  of  Carlisle,  peeping  over  a  fine  fertile 
country,  through  which  the  river  glided  in  a  broad,  clear,  quiet  stream,  between  high 
banks,  over-arched  with  wood. 

Having  crossed  the  stream,  I  passed  over  a  flat  swampy  tract,  called  Rockcliff 
Marsh,  to  the  border  of  the  Esk,  a  fine  river  abounding  with  salmon.  I  forded  it,  and 
still  found  myself  on  a  muddy  marsh,  overflowed  occasionally  by  the  tides  of  the  Solway. 
I  had  a  view  to  my  right  of  the  Solway  Moss,  which,  about  forty  years  ago,  floated  from 
its  station  in  a  black  flood,  and  devastated  a  great  quantity  of  fine  land.  About  a  mile 
north  of  the  Esk,  I  came  to  firmer  ground  recently  inclosed,  and  presently  hopped  over  the 
Sark,  and  took  off  my  hat  in  Scotland.  Before  me  lay  the  far-famed  Gretna,  awakening, 
of  course,  many  interesting  reflections,  and  calling  to  my  mind  all  the  hurry,  and  ardour, 
and  anxiety  of  fugitive  lovers  in  chaises  and  four.  The  country  about  it  is  exceedingly 
pretty,  rising  above  the  Firth  in  gentle  banks  and  gnolls,  covered  with  a  profusion  of 
wood,  which  shews  itself  from  a  distance,  and  is  the  first  welcome  signal  to  trembling 
couples  of  their  approaching  deliverance.  The  village  itself  is  not  such  as  one  might  wish 
to  see  amidst  Cyprian  bowers  and  groves,  consisting  only,  excepting  a  church  and  one 
decent  house,  of  three  or  four  miserable  huts,  with  no  public  accommodations  but  oat- 
cake and  whisk}-  at  the  worst  hut  in  the  place,  which  is  at  once  the  inn  and  the  post- 
office.  It  is  not  here,  however,  that  the  marriages  are  celebrated,  but  at  the  neighbouring 
village  of  Springfield,  where  there  are  two  inns,  at  which  people,  with  more  time  to  care 
about  eating  and  drinking  than  lovers,  could  have  no  reason  to  grumble.  I  enquired 
particularly,  as  it  may  be  supposed,  for  the  blacksmith,  who  has  had  the  credit  with  us  in 
the  south  of  being  the  Hymen  of  Gretna,  ever  since  we  have  known  that  there  was  such  a 
place.  There  is  no  such  person  however  now  in  existence,  nor  could  I  ascertain  that 
there  ever  was,  though  the  business  has  been  performed,  and  still  continues  to  be,  by 
dignitaries  of  equally  humble  callings.  The  trade  is  now  in  the  hands  of  two  people, 
hedgers  and  ditchers;  one  of  whom,  as  I  heard,  is  a  very  profligate  fellow,  ready  to  do  worse 
things  for  a  guinea  than  cheat  the  clergy  of  their  dues.  These  are  the  regular  traders,  but 
in  case  they  should  be  out  of  the  way,  there  are  plenty  of  jobbers  prepared  to  supply  their 
places.  They  are  very  exorbitant  in  their  demands,  raising  them  according  to  the  number 

of 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  175 

of  horses  in  a  chaise,  which  are  signs  of  the  wealth  or  haste  of  the  parties — both  good 
grounds  of  extortion.  The  ceremony  used,  for  those  who  think  it  necessary  to  stop  for 
any,  is  that  of  the  church  of  England. 

At  the  risk  of  incurring  the  scorn  of  all  masters  and  misses  under  twenty-one,  I 
venture  to  raise  my  voice  against  this  prophanation  of  a  solemn  and  beautiful  service,  by 
these  vulgar  mercenaries.  It  would  be  sad  canting  to  talk  about  the  sin  of  those  who 
profit  by  their  assistance ;  but  there  is  unquestionably  an  indecency  and  a  profligacy  in 
this  abuse  of  a  sacred  rite,  worth  the  consideration  of  cooler  heads  than  those  of  the 
couples  who  post  to  Gretna.  The  law  of  Scotland  may  not  be  able  to  check  these 
irregularities,  but  there  is  a  power,  I  suppose,  that  can  alter  or  add  to  the  law,  and  it 
would  surely  be  no  great  encroachment  on  the  liberty  of  the  subject  to  insist  that,  while  a 
man  must  have  a  licence  to  sell  whisky,  he  should  not  unconditionally  practise  the  trade 
of  marrying.  It  is  singular,  that  the  abuse  should  have  been  so  long  connived  at,  that 
while  our  dignitaries  of  the  church  interfere  with  laudable  zeal  to  pull  down  the  curtains  of 
our  theatres  on  the  first  moment  of  the  Sabbath,  and  visit  with  a  fine  the  impious  butcher 
or  baker  that  sells  a  bit  of  meat  or  bread  to  a  poor  man  on  a  Sunday,  who  has  no  money 
to  buy  either  at  any  other  time,  they  should  not  have  exerted  their  influence  to  suppress 
the  unholy  prelacy  of  these  blacksmiths  and  ditchers  at  Gretna. 

I  proceeded  from  this  notorious  place  to  Annan,  through  a  well-cultivated  country, 
quite  flat  along  the  shore  of  the  Firth,  but  rising  a  little  inland  in  gentle  undulations.  The 
Scottish  side  of  the  Solway  has  recently  assumed  an  entirely  new  face.  Thirty  years  ago, 
it  was  an  open  common,  left  in  a  state  of  nature  as  it  had  been  for  ages,  the  borderers 
in  days  of  old  having  little  interest  in  agricultural  pursuits,  as  by  covering  their  lands  with 
corn  they  would  only  have  presented  temptations  to  the  ravages  of  their  watchful  enemies 
on  the  opposite  coast.  The  whole  is  now  enclosed,  generally  in  tillage,  and  varied  by 
numerous  plantations. 

As  Annan  was  the  first  town  that  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  in  Scotland,  I  entered  it 
with  some  curiosity,  looking  out  narrowly  for  its  peculiar  marks  and  distinctions.  It  is  very 
agreeably  situated  on  an  eminence  above  a  fertile  valley,  watered  by  the  Annan,  which, 
about  a  mile  to  the  southward,  discharges  itself  into  the  Solway.  The  town  contains 
eighteen  hundred  inhabitants,  and  consists  principally  of  one  broad  unpaved  street,  headed  at 
one  end  by  the  gaol  with  a  tower  and  spire,  and  flanked  on  each  side  by  respectable  houses 
and  shops,  of  various  elevations,  and  jutting  out  in  various  degrees  of  projection,  with 
here  and  there  a  hut  amongst  them,  not  more  wretched,  I  can  scarcely  think,  than  some 
other  huts  that  I  have  seen,  but  singular  from  their  being  permitted  to  take  their  places 
in  the  great  street.  They  are  built  with  unhewn  stones  thrown  together  as  if  by  accident, 
and  covered  with  a  thatched  roof  black  with  rottenness,  but  giving  nourishment  to  a  har- 
vest of  rank  grass  and  weeds,  and  topped  by  most  uncouth  chimneys,  each  formed  by  four 
stakes  placed  about  a  foot  asunder,  and  wrapped  round  with  bands  of  straw,  or  filled  up 

with 


176  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

with  sods  of  earth.  One  is  not  surprised  at  seeing  such  kind  of  habitations  among  the 
wilds  of  the  mountains,  Avhere  every  man  builds  his  own  house  in  a  Robinson  Crusoe-like 
manner,  with  any  make-shift  materials  and  tools  that  he  can  find,  but  I  should  really 
scarcely  have  expected  to  find  them  in  a  land  of  bricks  and  mortar.  There  are  two  or 
three  alleys  in  Annan  filled  with  such  huts,  excepting  which,  it  has  a  very  creditable  ap- 
pearance, and  is  not  deformed  by  any  of  those  nuisances  which  an  Englishman  is  taught  to 
believe  are  inseparable  from  the  constitution  of  a  Scottish  town. 

That  whisky  is  the  favourite  drink  of  the  people  is  very  evident,  not  only  from  the 
prevalence  of  red  noses,  but  from  a  direct  notice  that  it  is  to  be  bought  at  every  other  house 
in  the  place.  The  vending  of  it  is  combined  with  every  trade,  every  dealer  well  knowing 
that  whatever  may  be  his  success  in  other  ventures,  he  is  sure  of  a  few  customers  for  this 
seductive  cordial.  Opposite  to  me,  as  I  sat  in  the  inn,  I  perceived  a  "  draper  and  dealer 
in  spirits;"  a  little  lower  down  is  a  "  grocer  and  dealer  in  spirits;"  and  in  the  town  is  a  still 
more  extraordinary  union,  a  "  banker  and  dealer  in  spirits."  Exclusive  of  these  supple- 
mentary dealers,  there  are  plenty  of  professed  publicans,  so  that  a  stranger  might  suspect 
that  this  was  the  great  whisky  magazine  of  the  nation,  till  he  discovered  that  in  the 
copiousness  of  its  store;  it  is  only  like  every  other  town  in  Scotland. 

I  must  find  fault  with  the  state  of  the  gaol  at  Annan,  though  I  was  requested  to  observe 
by  a  person  with  naturally  somewhat  more  pride  in  the  dignity  of  the  town  than  I  could 
have,  that  it  had  at  least  a  very  decent  exterior.  The  keeper  begged  leave  to  step  in 
before  me,  to  put  things  a  little  in  order;  but  I  pushed  in  after  him,  wishing  to  see  in  what 
order  they  were  usually  kept,  for  the  benefit  of  those  more  immediately  interested  than 
myself.  There  was  very  little  I  found  to  put  in  order,  for  I  observed  nothing  but  bare 
walls  and  floors,  and  these  were  as  dirty  as  possible.  The  gaol  is  much  too  small  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  prisoners,  and  wants  every  convenience  in  every  part  of  it  that 
could  contribute  to  their  health  and  comfort.  Debtors  here  have  no  outer  court  to  walk 
in  for  the  benefit  of  air  and  exercise,  and  are  confined  in  a  filthy  dungeon  of  a  room,  in 
which  one  should  be  shocked  to  see  the  worst  of  malefactors.  But  this  is  not  the  most 
miserable  apartment  in  the  prison.  "  There  is  a  hole  for  a  thief,"  said  the  keeper,  point- 
ing to  a  loathsome  den,  about  twelve  feet  square,  with  one  window,  which  admitted  the 
cold  and  wet,  being  defended  only  by  iron  bars,  and  a  stone  floor,  without  a  single  article 
of  furniture  upon  it,  except  a  bundle  of  black  damp  straw  in  one  corner,  designed  for  a 
bed.  Vagrants  and  people  taken  up  on  suspicion  are  confined  here.  If  on  examination 
they  cannot  render  a  good  account  of  themselves,  they  are  sent  to  Dumfries  to  wait  for 
their  trial ;  and  if  they  prove  themselves  innocent,  are  dismissed — but  not,  perhaps,  till 
after  a  confinement  of  some  days  in  this  horrid  hole,  where  a  man  of  delicate  constitution 
could  not  pass  a  night  without  danger  to  his  life. 

Happily  this  place  is  not  much  frequented,  the  blessings  of  early  education  and 
religious  instruction  that  are  extended  to  the  lowest  class  of  the  community  here  pre- 
serving 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  177 

serving  society  in  order,  and  leaving  little  necessity  for  prisons  and  houses  of  correction. 
There  is  a  classical  and  commercial  school  at  Annan  for  the  better  orders,  and  another  for 
the  children  of  the  poor ;  not  as  we  too  often  see  it  in  England,  under  the  management  of 
some  unqualified,  illiterate  fellow,  or  some  old  woman  just  able,  in  the  feebleness  of  her 
decline,  to  keep  a  few  brats  out  of  harm's  way,  but  a  man  of  substantial  acquirements, 
capable  of  fulfilling  all  the  duties  of  a  tutor  with  the  utmost  credit.  The  parish  schools, 
justly  the  boast  of  Scotland,  formed  interesting  subjects  of  inquiry  and  observation  to  me 
during  my  tour  in  the  country.  I  was  pleased  at  seeing  here,  for  the  first  time,  a  room 
full  of  dirty,  ragged  boys,  some  learning  English,  some  Latin,  and  some  arithmetic,  and  all 
obviously  in  earnest  and  attentive  to  their  tasks,  from  a  proper  reverence  for  their  respect- 
able teacher.  Those  who  fear  lest  the  whole  order  of  society  should  be  reversed  by 
our  teaching  those  to  read  and  write  whose  business  it  is  to  dig  and  delve,  might  have 
looked  with  horror  at  these  little  boys  with  no  shoes  to  their  feet  and  Latin  grammars  in 
their  hands ;  but,  in  effect,  not  the  slightest  evil  is  found  to  weigh  against  the  many 
advantages  which  they  derive  from  such  instruction;  and  they  grow  up  to  be  as  good 
weavers  and  ploughmen,  and  soldiers  and  sailors,  as  if  they  had  never  been  treated  like 
creatures  with  souls,  not  at  all  supposing  that  the  learning  which  they  receive  in  common 
with  all  their  countrymen  is  to  lift  them  from  their  humble  station,  and  give  them  bread 
without  labour.  The  lower  classes  in  Scotland  furnish  the  most  satisfactory  refutation  of 
all  the  arguments  that  have  been  adduced  against  the  policy  and  humanity  of  a  system  of 
universal  education.  They  are  beyond  all  comparison  the  best  informed,  the  most  moral 
and  orderly  people  in  Europe,  not  only  not  manifesting  the  smallest  tendency  to  insubor- 
dination and  discontentedness,  but  distinguishing  themselves  for  their  regularity  and 
industry  in  all  their  pursuits,  and  the  propriety  and  decency  of  their  conduct  in  all  the 
relations  of  life.  Their  education,  it  may  be  justly  affirmed,  is  of  no  direct  use  to  them  in 
the  ordinary  business  of  their  lives,  and  gives  them  no  superior  power  or  facility  in  the 
mechanical  arts,  by  which  they  are  clothed  and  fed ;  but  it  does  no  harm,  and  has  a  good 
effect  on  their  general  character ;  softens  their  manners,  quickens  their  moral  sense,  and 
awakens  in  them  a  pride  that  keeps  them  above  base  and  grovelling  vice.  It  does  not 
disqualify  or  indispose  them  for  the  humblest  occupations,  while  it  sometimes  extricates 
talent  from  an  order  of  the  community  usually  doomed  to  hopeless  obscurity,  and  ad- 
vances it  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  to  a  wider  sphere  of  action  and  usefulness.  The 
Scotch  consequently,  while  they  fag  and  plod  quite  as  ably  and  cheerfully  as  their 
neighbours  to  the  south,  furnish  far  more  instances  of  men  rising  from  low  stations  to  rank 
and  wealth,  whose  example  operates  as  a  stimulus  to  general  industry  and  good  conduct. 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  further  of  the  good  effects  resulting  from  this  general  cul- 
tivation of  the  people  as  I  go  on. 

The  trade  of  Annan,  from  the  pressure  of  the  times,  has  been  on  the  decline  of  late 
years.     It  formerly  imported  considerable  quantities  of  wine,  and  had  some  share  in  the 

VOL.  ii.  A  A  West 


178  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

West  India  trade,  but  has  now  no  foreign  commerce.  It  exports  grain  of  all  kinds, 
potatoes,  various  sorts  of  Scotch  timber,  freestone,  &c.  &c.  Coal,  limestone,  slates,  with 
a  variety  of  merchant  goods  from  Whitehaven  and  Liverpool,  and  a  cargo  or  two  of  timber 
annually  from  North  America,  are  imported.  Vessels  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  tons  can 
come  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the  town,  but  the  navigation  of  the  river  is  much 
obstructed  by  a  ledge  of  rocks  running  across  it,  half  a  mile  above  its  mouth.  The  rock 
is  a  soft  sandstone,  and  might  be  removed  without  difficulty  and  at  no  great  expense. 

The  Annan,  like  all  the  rivers  which  discharge  themselves  into  the  Solway,  abounds 
with  salmon.  The  fisheries  are  on  a  large  scale,  and  well  conducted.  The  Newby  fishery 
extending  about  three  miles  up  this  river,  and  six  or  seven  miles  along  the  shore  of  the 
Firth,  is  rented  at  ,£900  per  annum,  and  yields  probably  £2500.  The  fish  are  sold  on 
an  average  at  10 d.  per  pound.  The  net»  employed  to  catch  them  are  called  trap  nets. 
Stakes  are  fixed  in  the  sand  in  a  zig-zag  line,  with  a  trap  at  every  angle,  on  the  principle 
of  certain  mouse-traps  that  one  has  seen.  Two  converging  nets  open  with  a  narrow  aper- 
ture into  an  enclosed  space,  leaving  the  fish  no  outlet  but  that  through  which  it  entered, 
and  which  in  all  its  plans  of  escape  it  never  thinks  of,  though  it  has  no  frightful  spikes  to 
contend  against,  like  the  unfortunate  mouse  under  similar  circumstances  of  embarrassment. 
There  is  another  mode  of  salmon  fishing  practised  here  called  shauling,  from  its  being 
pursued  in  shallow  water.  A  man  is  armed  with  an  instrument  called  a  lister,  a  three- 
pronged  fork,  with  a  shaft  twenty  or  twenty-four  feet  long,  which  he  fixes  in  the  sand 
edgeways,  and  thrusts  before  him  like  a  shrimp-net.  But  there  is  a  more  spirited  manner 
of  using  this  weapon,  and  one  requiring  considerably  more  skill.  It  is  often  used  as  a 
spear,  the  sportsman  being  on  horseback,  and  hurling  it  sometimes  at  speed.  Some  of 
the  people  are  said  to  be  very  dexterous  at  this  exercise,  transfixing  a  fish  with  certainty 
at  a  great  distance. 

At  Newby,  close  to  the  shore,  a  little  west  of  the  Annan,  are  the  remains  of  a  castle : 
some  fragments  of  walls  of  enormous  thickness  lie  scattered  about  the  ground,  and  the 
foundations  of  the  building  still  appear  in  ridges  covered  with  earth,  from  which  we  may 
collect  that  it  was  of  immense  size.  It  was  built  by  one  of  the  Bruces,  Lords  of  Annan- 
dale.  The  great  Robert  Bruce  had  a  castle  at  Annan,  and  I  was  shewn  a  high  mount, 
partly  artificial,  in  a  gentleman's  garden,  which  he  was  willing  (and  I  heartily  went  along 
with  him)  to  think  the  site  of  it.  There  is  not  a  vestige  of  any  building  upon  it,  and  I 
was  too  much  inclined  to  think  for  the  interest  of  the  moment  that  the  summit  of  the 
mount  had  too  limited  a  surface  to  support  a  castle  suited  to  the  dignity  of  Bruce. 

Having  got  Annan  quite  by  heart,  I  set  out  again  on  my  tour,  meeting  with  nothing 
worthy  of  notice  till  I  came  to  Comlongan  castle,  the  ancient  seat  of  the  Stormonts,  which 
has  all  that  grandeur  that  is  derived  from  great  breadth  of  parts,  and  extraordinary  plain- 
ness and  simplicity.  It  consists  of  a  single  square  tower,  with  much  the  air  of  a  prison, 
entered  through  one  small  door-way  guarded  by  an  iron  door,  and  shewing  on  each  broad 

unornamented 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  179 

unornamented  front  a  few  irregular  windows,  through  which  the  eye  cannot  penetrate  into 
the  chambers  within,  seeing  only  the  vast  thickness  of  the  walls.  The  interior  is  laid  out 
and  finished  with  as  little  respect  for  comfort  or  show  as  possible,  as  if  the  architect  had 
determined  to  lay  bare  the  strength  of  his  building  before  the  eye,  undistinguished  by  one 
form  of  ornament  or  convenience.  The  entrance  opens  immediately  upon  a  winding 
stone  stair-case,  from  which  you  step  on  the  second  story  into  a  dark  dismal  apartment, 
occupying  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  space  within  the  walls,  and  lighted  (if  one 
may  say  so)  by  square  windows,  formerly  defended  by  iron  bars.  The  walls  are  twelve 
feet  thick,  narrowing  the  room  within  to  a  compass  that  surprises  one  after  looking  at  the 
breadth  of  their  external  surface.  This  apartment  is  only  twenty-four  feet  long  and  six- 
teen wide,  and  was  the  only  day-room  in  the  castle.  Above  it  is  a  chamber  of  equal 
dimensions,  which  has  no  appearance  of  having  ever  been  subdivided,  leaving  one  to  guess 
how  the  family  could  sleep  more  privately  than  they  dined,  and  how  in  their  hours  of  rest 
they  kept  themselves  detached  from  their  servants.  On  the  ground  floor  there  is  a  very 
small  room  with  a  vaulted  roof,  in  which  there  was  formerly  a  well.  There  is  another 
place  on  this  floor  which,  had  I  coveted  the  martyrdom  of  an  antiquary,  I  might  easily 
have  broken  my  neck  in  attempting  to  examine.  I  supposed  it  to  have  been  the  kitchen, 
and  it  might  have  been  likewise  the  servants  hall  and  bed-room ;  an  apartment  of  the 
same  kind  of  comprehensive  character  as  the  cobbler's  stall  in  the  song.  The  tower  is 
crowned  with  battlements  and  two  low  turrets,  from  whence  there  is  a  magnificent  view 
of  the  Cumberland  mountains  and  the  Solvvay  Firth,  with  every  estuary,  bay,  and  creek 
on  its  varied  shores,  and  its  broad  stream  opening  with  the  grandeur  of  an  American  river 
into  the  main  sea. 

I  have  been  particular  in  my  description  of  this  castle,  as  it  very  much  resembles 
almost  all  the  old  castles  now  to  be  seen  in  Scotland,  and  is  curious  as  a  specimen  of  the 
sort  of  habitations  that  men  of  rank,  wealth,  and  power  in  this  country  were  content  to 
live  in  at  no  very  remote  period.  It  was  inhabited  not  a  century  ago,  and  was  the  birth- 
place of  the  celebrated  Lord  Mansfield. 

Adjoining  the  castle  is  a  modern  house,  in  which  a  factor  of  Lord  Mansfield's  resides, 
with  every  comfort  and  accommodation  about  him,  held  in  so  much  contempt  by  the 
ancient  lords  of  the  domain.  Great  improvements  have  been  lately  made  on  the  estate 
under  the  skilful  superintendance  of  this  gentleman,  who  pointed  out  to  me  as  the  peculiar 
object  of  his  care  and  pride,  a  plantation  covering  more  than  two  hundred  acres  of  ground 
and  shooting  up  prosperously.  On  the  shore  below  the  castle  a  tract  of  two  hundred 
acres  has  just  been  recovered  by  means  of  an  embankment  from  the  sea,  which  is,  how- 
ever, taking  ample  revenge  on  other  parts  of  the  coast  for  this  act  of  usurpation.  The 
estuary  of  the  river  Locher,  a  little  north  of  the  redeemed  land,  which  a  few  years  ago 
was  only  fifty  yards  wide,  is  now  considerably  more  than  half  a  mile,  and  is  bounded  on 
one  side  by  a  singular  little  peninsula,  called  Blackshaw  Point,  now  almost  worn  away, 

A  A  2  and 


180  VOYAGE    ROUND   GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  running  out  like  a  ribband  nearly  a  mile  into  the  sea.  The  whole  coast  on  this  side 
of  the  Solway  is  perfectly  flat,  and  not  protected  by  any  depth  of  beach  along  the  shore. 
Its  defenceless  state  between  the  Annan  and  the  Locher  is  the  more  serious,  as  in  this 
interval  there  is  not  a  hill  for  many  miles  inland  to  limit  the  advances  of  the  sea.  The 
land  might  be  secured  by  a  well  constructed  embankment,  and  if  these  were  times  for 
vigorous  enterprise  in  agriculture,  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  great  extent  of  ground  might 
be  recovered  from  the  Solway.  In  neap  tides  the  sea  does  not  approach  the  border  of 
the  sands  within  half  a  mile,  so  that  an  opportunity  would  be  afforded  of  giving  several 
days  of  uninterrupted  labour  to  an  embankment,  as  neap  tides  recurred,  besides  six  or 
seven  hours  daily  by  the  ordinary  ebbing  of  the  tide. 

At  a  short  distance  west  of  Comlongan  I  came  to  the  village  of  Powhellin,  which 
gave  me  a  more  complete  idea  of  the  utmost  rudeness  of  Scottish  cottages  than  I  had  yet 
formed.     It  contained  twelve  mud  huts,  with  walls  full  of  grooves  and  hollows,  the  effects 
of  the  rains,  thatched  roofs,  ready  for  the  scythe,  and  the  same  kind  of  grotesque  and 
preposterous  chimneys  that  I  had  seen  at  Annan, — altogether  such  a  cluster  of  dwellings 
as  a  man  would  not  have  seen  for  the  first  time  without  surprise  in  the  remotest  regions 
of  the  uncivilized  world.     These  mud-huts,  however,  as  they  are  called,  in  spite  of  the  ex- 
ceeding meanness  of  their  exterior,  are  far  superior  in  positive  comfort  to  many  stone- 
built  cottages  such  as  one  sees  in  this  country  and  in  many  parts  of  England  too — cottages 
with  a  better  name,  and  of  a  less  wig-wamish  appearance,  but  not  half  so  warm  and  sub- 
stantial, admitting  wind  and  water  through  numberless  chinks  and  crevices,  occasioned 
by  irreconcileable  differences  between  the  points  and  angles  of  unhewn  and  uncemented 
stones.     Mud-huts  have  the  cardinal  merit  of  being  perfectly  weather-proof.     Those  at 
Powhellin  have  a  foundation  of  stone  three  feet  high,  on  which  is  raised  a  wall  two  feet 
thick,  composed  of  clay  mixed  with  straw.     A  hut  so  constructed  will  last  thirty  or  forty 
years,  wasting  away  only  on  the  side  that  is  exposed  to  the  stormy  rains  from  the  south. 
The  insides  of  them  baffle  all  description.     As  each  usually  contains  only  one  room,  in 
which  the  family  with  all  their  worldly  property  must  somehow  be  packed,  it  would  be 
harsh  and  unreasonable  to  complain  of  a  want  of  neatness  and  tidiness  of  arrangement ; 
but  the  dirt  that  shews  itself  amidst  the  jumbled  litter  of  children,  dogs,  chickens,  beds, 
chairs,  old  coats,  and  breeches,  and  stockings,  scythes,  shrimp-nets,  pitchforks,  and  spin- 
ning wheels,  and  an  incredible  number  of  other  materials  that  are  and  are  not  wanted,  is 
quite  abominable.     If  one  had  not  actually  seen  the  people  sitting  in  all  the  calmness  of 
domestic  ease  before  him,  he  might  have  supposed  on  looking  into  one  of  these  comfort- 
less dwellings  that  it  had  not  been  inhabited  for  years,  and  was  reserved  as  the  common 
lumber-room  of  the  village,  in  which  any  one  might  cram  a  chair,  or  throw  a  tool,  or 
house  a  pig  that  he  knew  not  how  otherwise  to  dispose  of.     That  it  was  a  place  in  which 
a  family,  not  Hottentots,  performed  the  ceremonies  of  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping,  one 
should  not  have  entertained  the  suspicion  of  a  moment. 

Yet 


VOYAGE  HOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  181 

Yet  in  these  miserable  hovels  I  found  the  people  exceedingly  decent  in  their  man- 
ners, with  their  minds  improved  and  refined  by  education, — sunk  into  a  state  of  the  pro- 
foundest  piggishness  in  all  their  forms  of  living,  yet  highly  civilized,  intelligent,  and  moral. 
There  was  not  a  man  or  woman  in  the  village  that  could  not  read  and  write,  nor  a  single 
hut  without  a  book.  A  little  boy  not  more  than  nine  years  old,  without  shoes  or  shirt, 
and  only  half  a  sleeve  to  his  jacket,  and  not  a  button  or  button-hole  about  him,  came 
running  up  to  me  with  some  shells  for  sale :  I  offered  to  buy  his  whole  stock  if  he  could 
read  a  page  in  my  itinerary,  and  he  fulfilled  the  condition  with  the  utmost  facility. 

This  general  diffusion  of  knowledge  amongst  the  lowest  classes  of  the  people  is  really 
quite  delightful,  and  gives  a  redeeming  grace  to  them,  which  shines  like  a  gem  amidst  all 
the  poverty  and  wretchedness  and  squalidness  of  their  condition.  I  am  not  prone  to  en- 
thusiastic exaggeration,  and  am  not  stating  as  facts  the  mere  fanciful  results  of  speculative 
opinions  It  is  impossible  for  any  man  with  any  degree  of  observation  and  discrimina- 
tion to  pass  through  this  country  without  perceiving  the  marked  and  happy  effects  pro- 
duced on  the  character  of  the  poor  by  education,  without  noting  an  evident  distinction 
between  them  and  people  of  the  same  rank  in  England,  in  their  general  civility,  in  the 
uniform  decency  of  their  moral  conduct,  and  the  extent  of  their  intellectual  advancement. 
Travelling  through  obscure  villages  and  holding  conversations  continually  with  their 
humble  inhabitants,  I  had  a  good  opportunity  of  discovering  how  impartially  education 
had  extended  its  benefits,  even  to  the  poorest,  and  of  observing  how  much  of  real  cultiva- 
tion and  improvement  there  was  in  those  whom,  from  their  apparent  poverty  and  the  un- 
accountable wretchedness  of  their  habitations,  a  hasty  traveller  might  have  supposed  to 
have  lived  quite  despised  and  neglected.  Wherever  I  went,  I  met  with  the  same  civility 
and  intelligence.  If  I  took  a  guide  from  a  mud-hut,  I  was  sure  to  find  him  a  man  of 
some  information,  understanding  readily  the  objects  of  my  pursuit,  not  receiving  my  ques- 
tions with  a  silly  shyness  and  suspicion,  or  a  stupid  stare  of  insuperable  incapacity,  but 
stirring  himself  to  satisfy  my  enquiries,  and  acquainting  me  with  many  little  facts  con- 
cerning his  native  place,  and  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  country  about  him,  that 
would  certainly  not  have  occurred  as  of  any  importance,  if  they  had  occurred  at  all,  to 
one  whose  mind  had  not  been  in  some  degree  enlarged  by  instruction.  And  yet  with  all 
this  intelligence  they  combine  no  absurd  pride  and  self  importance,  and  none  of  that  in- 
solence and  impertinent  assumption  which  many  imagine  to  be  the  unavoidable  results  of 
education  in  the  poor.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  remarkable  for  the  respectfulness  of 
their  behaviour,  and  do  not  more  excel  the  people  of  the  south  in  acuteness  and  know- 
ledge, than  in  courtesy  and  amenity  of  manners. 

It  is  not  too  much  knowledge,  but  too  much  money  that  has  sometimes  an  injurious 
effect  upon  the  minds  of  the  common  people,  and  inclines  them  to  be  dissatisfied  with 
the  laborious  drudgery  to  which  they  are  born.  Knowledge  gives  power  and  command 
when  a  man  possesses  an  extraordinary  measure  of  it ;  but  that  degree  of  it  which  he 

shares 


182  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

shares  in  common  with  the  whole  community,  of  which  he  is  a  member,  gives  none,  and 
leads  to  no  consideration,  and  procures  and  promises  no  distinctions  that  can  stimulate 
insolence  and  pride.  But  money  is  power  in  all  hands,  and  when  possessed  by  the  lower 
orders  in  a  proportion  more  than  necessary  to  their  comfortable  maintenance,  it  gives 
them  a  command  over  luxuries  and  dissipation,  and  creates  tastes  and  desires  in  them, 
that  are  incompatible  with  plodding  industry,  and  are  apt  to  make  them  discontented 
with  their  proper  place  in  society.  Look  to  the  rude  unimproved  manufacturer  of 
Lancashire,  with  his  pockets  full  of  money,  and  to  the  penniless  Scotchman,  with  his 
power  of  reading  and  writing,  and,  if  you  please  to  put  an  extreme  case,  with  his  smatter- 
ing of  Latin  and  mathematics,  and  it  will  soon  be  seen  which  is  most  disposed  to  be  loud 
and  turbulent,  and  grumble  at  that  order  of  things  under  which  he  is  bound  to  a  life  of 
hard  and  humble  toil.  I  am  scarcely  contending  in  these  times  that  too  much  money  is 
the  only  or  the  most  fertile  source  of  the  vices  and  miseries  of  the  labouring  people,  but 
simply  that  it  is  sometimes  productive  of  that  peculiar  mischief,  which  many,  with  a  per- 
verse inattention  to  the  results  of  experiment,  have  supposed  to  be  the  natural  conse- 
quence of  education.  There  are  temptations  to  vicious  courses  and  unlawful  modes  of 
relief  springing  from  extreme  poverty,  which  it  requires  some  strength  of  moral  principle, 
derived  from  early  precept  and  instruction,  to  resist,  and  the  Scotch  distinguish  themselves 
far  above  their  uneducated  neighbours  in  the  south,  by  their  quiet  submission  and  steady 
conduct  under  the  pressure  and  pain  of  this  galling  load. 

It  is  very  extraordinary  that  the  lower  orders  in  Scotland,  though  thus  distinguished 
above  the  poor  of  any  other  country  for  their  mental  cultivation,  should  in  their  domestic 
habits  be  nearly  as  unformed  as  the  Hottentots.  This  combination  of  intellectual  im- 
provement and  moral  elevation  with  so  lamentable  an  ignorance  of  all  the  comforts  and 
conveniences  of  life,  or  rather,  perhaps,  with  so  supreme  an  indifference  for  them,  forms 
an  exception  to  the  general  harmony  and  correspondence  of  character  that  is  ordinarily 
preserved  in  all  the  ramifications  and  subdivisions  of  civilization,  for  which  I  cannot  at  all 
account.  Man  sometimes  continues  perfectly  stationary  for  ages,  in  a  state  of  complete 
barbarism,  but  when  he  begins  to  improve,  he  goes  on  regularly  and  consistently — puts 
on  breeches,  takes  to  washing  his  hands  and  face,  and  as  his  mind  becomes  cultivated 
and  his  knowledge  extended,  grows  still  more  nice  in  his  taste  and  more  elaborate  in  his 
refinements,  joyfully  employing  all  the  resources  of  his  art  to  make  his  person  and  his 
habitation  decent  and  comfortable.  When  he  is  acquainted  with  the  general  discoveries 
of  society,  and  can  read  and  write,  we  do  not  find  him  clinging  to  his  pristine  way  of 
eating  his  meal  unroasted;  and  when  he  has  conquered  his  ignorance,  the  first  great  cause 
of  all  his  barbarism,  should  certainly  be  surprised  to  see  him  more  behindhand  in  some  of 
the  simplest  elements  of  civilization,  than  when  ashamed  of  his  nakedness  and  his  dirt 
he  first  coveted  breeches  and  soap.  Yet  we  really  do  see  this  in  Scotland,  where  the 
lower  classes,  though  partaking  very  unusually  of  the  benefits  of  knowledge,  are  yet  not 

reclaimed 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  183 

reclaimed  from  the  coarseness  and  filthiness  of  savage  life — betraying  in  the  whole  style 
and  management  of  their  homes  a  degree  of  rudeness,  scarcely  less  astonishing  to  one 
familiar  only  with  the  neatness  and  comeliness  of  English  cottages,  than  if  he  had  found 
them  going  naked  and  living  upon  ra\v  flesh.  Here  are  the  Irish,  the  most  barbarous, 
and  the  Scotch,  the  most  cultivated  people  of  Europe,  living  in  the  same  kind  of  habita- 
tions, equally  remote  from  all  that  art  can  do  to  give  them  grace  and  comfort. 

It  is  not  extreme  poverty  that  is  the  cause  of  this  unseemly  and  incongruous  rude- 
ness, for  we  find  it  in  those  who  have  all  the  command  over  cleanliness  and  decent  show 
that  money  can  give,  and  sometimes  see  a  strong  cast  of  it  in  people  quite  in  another 
rank  of  life,  whom  we  have  been  accustomed  to  consider  as  long  since  naturalized  in  the 
paths  of  elegance  and  refinement.  It  prevails  in  every  part  of  the  Lowlands  of  Scotland 
through  which  I  have  travelled,  and  I  have  seen  it  still  more  strikingly  exemplified  in 
the  Highlands.  There  that  dirt-born  complaint,  vulgarly  styled  the  fiddle  of  this  country, 
still  lives  unmolested,  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation  with  the  security  of 
property  confirmed  by  venerable  descent,  and  long  legitimacy.  It  is  not  unusual  to  see 
a  Highland  farmer,  with  land  in  fee-simple,  the  owner  of  herds  of  cattle,  deliberately 
scratching  his  fingers  all  the  while  that  he  is  talking  to  you  of  his  growing  improvements, 
and  shewing  from  the  composure  of  his  countenance  .that  he  is  suffering  nothing  either 
from  pain  or  shame.  If  you  were  to  ask  him  why  he  did  not  have  recourse  to  the  simple 
remedy  that  would  relieve  him  from  his  disorder,  he  would  tell  you  that  it  gave  him  no 
kind  of  uneasiness,  that  it  was  always  so,  and  was  as  natural  to  his  fingers  as  his  nails. 
I  have  seen  a  gentleman  in  the  Highlands  who  received  this  odious  distemper,  together 
with  his  rent,  from  one  of  his  most  respectable  tenants,  and  was  consequently  obliged  to 
perform  quarantine  in  his  own  house,  seeing  his  wife  and  family  only  through  the  key- 
hole. The  complaint  I  am  happy  to  think  is  nearly  extirpated  in  the  Lowlands,  as  I  do 
not  remember  to  have  seen  one  instance  of  it  there. 

This  description  of  national  manners  and  habits,  the  result  of  actual  and  extended 
observation,  is  somewhat  prematurely  introduced  in  this  early  part  of  my  tour  in  the 
country,  but  the  subject  was  in  a  manner  forced  upon  me  on  my  notice  of  the  little 
village  of  Powhellin,  whose  inhabitants  furnish  striking  examples  of  that  mingled  cultiva- 
tion and  barbarism,  that  form  so  generally  the  distinctions  of  the  Scottish  peasantry. 
There  is  a  mixture  of  sour  and  sweet  in  my  remarks,  but  the  latter  predominates,  and 
may  well  atone  for  the  other ;  for  after  all,  intellectual  refinement  and  moral  rectitude 
are  far  nobler  subjects  of  pride  to  a  people  than  external  cleanliness  and  polish.  It 
would  undoubtedly,  however,  be  highly  desirable  to  see  them  combined,  and  as  there 
seem  to  be  no  obstacles  to  their  union  but  a  little  perversity  and  prejudice  on  the  part  of 
the  people,  I  have  thought  it  fair  to  attack  their  deformities  with  some  ridicule,  as  the 
best  and  most  searching  weapon  that  could  be  employed.  I  hope  that  I  shall  not  pro- 
voke 


184  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

voke  the  animosity  of  any  one ;  but  be  that  as  it  may,  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  feeling 
that  I  have  not  wilfully  mis-stated  any  thing,  and  in  telling  the  truth,  have  told  it  with  the 
best  intentions.  "  Nothing  extenuate,  nor  set  down  aught  in  malice," — is  an  excellent 
rule  for  a  tourist,  and  I  have  at  least  the  merit  of  not  having  offended  against  the  latter 
and  most  essential  part  of  it.  I  beg  to  declare  that  my  remarks  on  the  filthiness  of 
Scottish  cottages  are  meant  to  apply  only  to  the  small  towns  and  the  villages,  and  cannot 
with  any  justice  be  extended,  in  their  full  force,  to  the  large  towns,  where  the  people  have 
been  forced  and  shamed  into  more  refinement  by  the  example  of  the  higher  orders,  and 
the  nuisance-routing  arm  of  the  police. 

The  poor  inhabitants  of  Powhellin  help  to  eke  out  a  subsistence  by  making  salt, 
which  they  do  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  at  a  more  than  ordinary  cost  of  care  and  pains. 
As  it  is  only  with  spring  tides  that  the  sea  approaches  near  enough  to  their  pans  to  per- 
mit them  to  get  salt  water,  they  collect  the  sand  that  has  been  impregnated  by  it,  and 
placing  it  in  a  heap,  pour  fresh  water  over  it,  which  filters  through  it  into  a  receiver,  and 
is  then  boiled  in  shallow  pans  till  it  evaporates  and  lets  fall  the  salt.  As  not  the  slightest 
attention  is  paid  to  cleanliness  in  the  whole  process  of  preparation,  the  material  comes 
forth  quite  as  like  in  appearance  to  coal-dust  as  salt ;  but  does  very  well,  as  I  was  told, 
for  curing  fish.  They  sell  it  at  three-farthings  a  pound,  and  can  afford  to  sell  it  at  this 
cheap  rate,  having  the  privilege  of  making  it  duty-free.  The  privilege  is  derived  from  a 
royal  grant,  and  is  peculiar  to  this  place.  James  the  Sixth,  prior  to  his  accession  to  the 
throne  of  England,  in  passing  through  the  country,  noticed  the  people  here  at  their  em- 
ployment of  salt-making,  and  was  so  pleased  with  their  industry,  that  he  rewarded  them 
by  relieving  it  from  all  incumbrance. 

About  a  mile  west  of  the  village,  the  Locher  discharges  itself  into  the  sea,  a  very 
small  river,  which  flows  through  Locher  Moss,  a  vast  tract  of  barrenness,  lying  in  the  heart 
of  a  cultivated  country.  This  moss  is  ten  miles  in  length  and  between  two  and  three  in 
breadth,  containing  ten  thousand  acres  of  land.  The  tradition  of  the  neighbourhood 
here  is,  that  it  travelled  from  Ireland  at  some  remote  period,  and  invaded  and  usurped  a 
fertile  plain  which  it  now  covers.  The  itinerary  disposition  of  these  surfaces  is  sufficiently 
established  by  the  mischievous  restlessness  of  the  Sol  way  moss ;  but  the  miraculous  jour- 
ney of  this  wandering  bog  from  Ireland  is  not  countenanced  by  signs  at  present  observed 
about  it,  which  seem  to  determine  that  it  owed  its  origin  to  an  irruption  of  the  sea.  Sea- 
sand  and  sleech  are  found  beneath  it,  and  fragments  of  boats,  oars,  and  anchors  and 
cables  have  been  dug  out  of  it.  Cultivation  is  slowly  creeping  in  upon  this  wide-spread 
waste  round  its  edges,  and  in  better  times  we  may  see  the  whole  covered  with  pasture 
and  corn. 

The  Locker,  though  a  very  insignificant  stream  in  appearance,  is  very  productive.  It 
abounds  with  pike,  perch,  trout,  and  eel.  A  few  otters  frequent  it,  sore  enemies  to  the 

pike, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  185 

pike,  but  not  without  use,  as  the  ravenous  pike  are  enemies  to  all  the  other  fish.  Flocks 
of  wild  ducks  and  teals  are  seen  here  throughout  the  year,  and  a  few  herons  in  their 
season  keep  their  lonely  watch  upon  the  swampy  banks  at  the  river's  mouth. 

Half  a  mile  further  to  the  westward,  on  a  peninsula  guarded  by  the  rivers  Locker 
and  Nith,  and  by  the  Sol  way  Firth,  stands  the  famous  castle  of  Caerlaveroc,  once  the  seat 
of  the  Maxwells,  a  building  of  a  very  different  character  from  that  of  Comlongon,  retain- 
ing traces  of  much  magnificence,  with  more  of  elegance  and  decoration  than  we  often  see 
combined  with  the  solidity  and  strength  of  military  architecture.  There  are  few  remains 
of  castles  like  this  in  Scotland.  I  have  seen  none  at  all  comparable  with  it,  nor  any  other 
that  gave  me  any  idea  of  a  princely  palace,  though  it  is  in  a  melancholy  state  of  ruin,  and 
left  open  to  the  wanton  mischief  of  all  who  choose  to  despoil  it.  Its  grandeur  is  purely 
its  own,  for  it  is  in  a  very  bad  situation,  at  least  for  the  purposes  of  show,  standing  on  a 
flat,  from  which  it  cannot  be  seen  to  advantage  from  any  distance.  The  ground,  however, 
is  improved  by  some  fine  trees,  which  give  a  gloom  and  solemnity  to  it,  harmonizing  with 
the  antiquity  and  the  ruinousness  of  the  building. 

One  is  struck  with  the  little  precaution  that  was  employed  in  the  construction  of  this 
fortress  to  keep  an  enemy  at  a  distance  from  the  body  of  the  building.  It  has  no  out- 
works, except  a  deep  ditch  surrounding  it  at  the  distance  of  a  few  yards  from  the  walls. 
The  castle  forms  a  triangle,  with  a  round  tower  at  each  point  of  the  base,  and  two  noble 
towers  at  the  upper  point,  between  which  is  a  lofty  Gothic  arch  forming  the  entrance. 
The  wall  connecting  the  two  towers  over  the  arch  is  crowned  with  a  small  square  tower, 
which  had  formerly  turrets  at  the  angles.  An  arched  passage,  which  was  very  strongly 
guarded  by  portcullises  and  several  gates,  leads  into  the  court.  Two  gateways,  one  on 
each  side  of  it,  lead  into  small  spaces,  designed,  I  imagine,  for  dungeons,  which  open  into 
the  round  towers.  On  entering  the  court,  a  mournful  exhibition  of  faded  and  ruinous 
magnificence  bursts  upon  the  eye ;  sculptured  walls,  and  windows,  and  doorways,  and  spa- 
cious and  beautiful  apartments,  all  broken  and  disfigured,  and  hastening  to  the  ground. 

On  the  east  side  were  the  state  apartments,  the  walls  of  which  are  elevated  consider- 
ably above  those  of  any  other  part  of  the  building  between  the  towers.  The  front  is 
divided  into  three  stories,  and  displays  nine  square  windows  diminishing  in  size  from  the 
ground  story  upwards,  and  all  crowned  with  small  arches  resting  on  pilasters,  and  orna- 
mented in  the  spaces  within  them  with  devices  of  sculpture,  coats  of  arms  on  the  lower  tier, 
and  designs  from  legendary  tales  on  the  tiers  above.  The  whole  front  is  faced  with  a 
beautiful  freestone,  and  from  the  profusion  of  sculpture  upon  it,  executed  with  great  spirit  and 
elegance,  has  a  very  rich  and  splendid  effect.  The  walls  on  the  opposite  side  are  plain, 
but  the  apartments  within,  like  those  indeed  of  the  whole  castle,  exhibit  traces  of  the  same 
kind  of  costly  decoration.  At  the  north  end  is  the  great  hall,  ninety-one  feet  long,  and 
twenty-six  feet  wide,  lighted  by  very  large  and  highly  ornamented  windows,  and  entered 
by  a  handsome  doorway  supported  by  round  columns,  which  we  may  still  see  had  some 

VOL.  ii.  B  B  rich 


186  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

rich  carving  on  their  capitals.  This  once  superb  apartment  has  suffered  pre-eminently 
from  violence,  but  still  retains  enough  of  its  original  character  to  shew  that  it  was  suited  to 
the  pomp  of  a  king.  The  castle  altogether,  in  point  of  vastness  and  dignity  of  situation, 
is  not  to  be  compared  with  several  castles  to  be  seen  in  Wales;  but  in  the  splendour  of  its 
architecture,  it  conveys  a  greater  idea  than  any  of  them  of  princely  luxury  and  mag- 
nificence. 

The  most  memorable  event  recorded  in  the  history  of  this  fortress  is  the  appearance 
before  it  of  Edward  the  First  in  person,  in  the  year  1300,  at  the  head  of  a  large  army,  with 
which  he  had  invaded  Scotland  under  great  anger  and  alarm  at  the  rising  power  and 
daring  of  the  hero  Wallace.  The  castle  was  taken  after  a  gallant  resistance,  and  the 
garrison  honourably  and  humanely  treated.  Caerlavaroc  had  its  full  share  of  honours  and 
defeats,  and  ruin  and  renovation  in  the  turbulent  periods  of  Scottish  history  in  after  times, 
though  it  still  retains  much  the  same  form  and  appearance  as  described  in  an  old  manu- 
script poem  in  barbarous  French  that  records  the  events  of  the  siege  under  Edward. 

Continuing  my  journey  westward,  I  soon  came  to  the  broad  estuary  of  the  Nith, 
distinct  in  every  point  of  scenery  from  the  rivers  that  had  so  frequently  intercepted  me  in 
my  way  of  late,  and  which,  as  far  as  I  could  trace  their  course,  flowed  through  marshes 
or  mosses  between  low  and  muddy  banks.  A  long  and  lofty  ridge  separates  the  Nith  from 
Locker  Moss,  descending  to  the  water  with  a  rapid  slope.  This  ridge,  for  an  extent  of 
several  miles  up  the  river,  is  rough  and  naked;  but  nothing  can  be  more  beautiful  than 
the  scenery  on  the  opposite  side,  which  presented  itself  to  me  under  a  most  brilliant  effect 
produced  by  the  western  sun.  The  river,  raised  by  the  tide,  was  nearly  a  mile  in  breadth, 
and  had  all  the  clearness,  and  smoothness,  and  splendour  of  a  lake.  The  mountain 
Criffel  stood  centinel  at  the  mouth,  rising  to  the  height  of  more  than  six  hundred  yards, 
a  vast,  solemn  mass,  dark  and  barren,  but  with  a  small  tract  of  cultivated  ground  between 
its  base  and  the  river.  To  the  northward  of  this  mountain  appeared  the  summits  of  a 
range  of  rude  and  heath-clad  hills,  the  back  ground  to  a  varied  landscape  of  wooded  glens 
and  hollows,  amidst  hills  and  braes,  crowned  with  wild  verdure,  or  adorned  with  fields  of 
corn  and  meadows  spotted  with  cattle — the  silvery  river  shining  in  front,  and  reflecting 
with  the  distinctness  of  reality  a  long  line  of  wood  that  darkened  its  border.  A  few  miles 
higher  up  the  stream  contracts,  but  still  preserves  a  fine  breadth,  and  flows  to  Dumfries 
through  a  lovely  valley,  verdant  and  shady,  with  the  country  on  each  side  in  the  highest 
state  of  cultivation,  and  animated  by  gentlemen's  seats,  and  farms,  and  cottages,  and  all 
the  cheerful  signs  of  populousness  and  prosperous  industry. 

I  thought  the  entrance  into  Dumfries,  the  capital  of  the  south  of  Scotland,  very  un- 
promising, and  as  I  passed  through  a  mean  street  between  two  rows  of  the  aboriginal  huts 
of  the  island,  was  preparing  some  bitter  reproaches;  but  before  I  had  time  to  note  them 
down  in  my  common-place-book,  I  was  in  the  High-street,  which  at  once  changed  my  dis- 
position, displaying  a  stateliness  suited  to  a  town  of  this  rank  and  importance  in  the 

country. 


VOVAOE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN".  187 

country.  This  street,  containing  the  largest  and  most  respectable  part  of  the  town,  is 
irregular,  and  laid  out  on  rough  steep  ground,  not  happily  adapted  to  the  security  and 
convenience  of  horses  and  carriages ;  but  it  is  of  a  fine  breadth,  with  houses  and  shops  on 
each  side  of  a  magnitude,  beauty,  and  elegance,  that  would  do  credit  to  any  town  in  the 
kingdom.  The  eye  is  offended  by  the  awkward  situation  of  the  town-hall,  which  stands 
plump  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  interfering  materially  with  the  beauty  of  its  perspective, 
and  not  a  little  with  its  commodiousness  as  a  thoroughfare.  There  are  several  other 
very  good  streets,  one  in  particular  of  great  elegance,  called  Buccleugh-street,  but  just 
finished,  and  not  yet  inhabited.  Dumfries,  like  all  the  towns  of  any  consequence  in 
Scotland,  is  built  of  stone,  which  adds  much  to  the  beauty  and  dignity  of  its  appearance. 
I  strayed  into  one  or  two  miserable  alleys,  and  observed  that  some  of  the  better  streets, 
with  their  modern  improvements,  were  deformed  by  the  unseemly  intervention  of  some  of 
the  ancient  huts;  but  the  battering-ram  of  reform,  which  is  active  in  its  operations  here, 
will  soon,  it  has  been  foretold,  level  them  with  the  dust. 

There  are  eight  thousand  inhabitants  in  this  town,  and  two  thousand  in  its  dependent 
village  of  Max  well,  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.  This  village  furnishes  a  striking  example 
of  the  energy  and  rapidity  of  improvement  in  this  district.  A  few  years  ago  it  was  a  sink  of 
filth,  wretchedness,  and  worthlessness,  peopled  principally  by  vagrants  from  Ireland,  noted 
for  their  laziness,  drunkenness,  and  quarrelsomeness.  It  now  bears  a  very  different  character : 
the  houses  have  been  thoroughly  cleansed  inside  and  out,  and  are  neat  and  decent;  and  the 
people  having  undergone  the  same  operation,  have  become  sober,  quiet,  and  industrious. 

The  public  buildings  and  charitable  establishments  of  Dumfries  are  all  on  a  scale 
suited  to  its  wealth  and  respectability.  There  is  a  public  infirmary  here,  supported  by 
subscription,  which  was  founded  thirty-seven  years  ago,  and  was  the  second  institution  of 
the  kind  established  in  Scotland.  It  includes  a  military  ward  and  a  lunatic  asylum. 
The  building  is  spacious  and  commodious,  and  kept  in  the  nicest  order,  with  a  pious  atten- 
tion to  cleanliness.  It  has  comfortable  accommodations  for  forty  patients ;  and  the  medical 
attendants  give  assistance  to  as  many  out-patients  as  their  time  will  permit.  The  charity 
extends  to  persons  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  when  properly  recommended. 

The  gaol,  in  the  cleanliness  of  all  its  divisions,  does  credit  to  the  officers  who  have 
the  charge  of  it;  but  it  is  too  confined  to  admit  of  a  proper  classification  of  the  prisoners — 
the  most  serious  objection  that  could  be  formed  against  it,  were  it  not  in  a  country  where 
few  criminals  are  found  of  any  desperate  wickedness.  The  walls  of  the  prison  inclose  the 
courts  of  justice,  and  as  a  new  court-house  is  now  building,  these  may  be  converted  into 
rooms  for  the  prisoners,  and  obviate  the  defect  that  I  have  mentioned.  The  assizes  for 
Kircudbrightshireand  Dumfriesshire  are  holden  here,  and  were  just  about  to  take  place  for 
the  trial  of  a  single  prisoner,  a  woman,  for  some  petty  offence.  On  an  average,  not  more 
than  six  cases  for  trial  occur  in  a  year,  a  most  striking  and  gratifying  fact,  and  well  worth 
the  attention  of  those  who  would  withhold  the  blessings  of  education  from  the  poor. 

BBS  There 


188  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

There  are  two  churches  in  Dumfries,  marked  by  the  plainness  and  simplicity,  which 
are  the  essential  distinctions  of  the  kirk  of  Scotland.  But  in  one  of  them,  St.  Michael's, 
that  ostentatious  decoration  denied  to  the  church  has  been  amply  conferred  on  the  burial- 
place,  which,  in  the  grandeur  and  costliness  of  its  monuments,  far  excels  any  piece  of 
ground  of  equal  extent  that  I  ever  saw  in  any  part  of  the  kingdom.  On  passing  down  the 
street  in  which  the  church  stands,  the  attention  of  the  stranger  is  imperatively  arrested  by 
three  or  four  immense  masses  of  stone  standing  above  the  outer  wall,  which  have  a 
resemblance  to  huge  irregular  battlements.  These  uncouth  cumbrous  structures,  which 
bear  the  dates  of  1629, 32,  33,  are  loaded  with  much  vulgar  finery  in  the  way  of  sculptural 
embellishment,  and  covered  with  Latin  inscriptions  full  of  unmeasured  panegyric,  com- 
mon-place morality,  and  bad  spelling.  From  these  originals  a  kind  of  taste  seems  to  have 
sprung  for  monumental  parade,  which  has  been  regularly  transmitted  down  to  the  present 
time ;  and  the  churchyard  is  now  so  crowded  with  columns,  pyramids,  and  canopies,  that 
to  have  a  monument  here  is  clearly  a  fashion  and  not  a  distinction.  I  hope  not  to  give 
offence,  but  there  really  seems  to  be  a  very  frivolous  ostentation  in  this  indiscriminate 
waste  of  sepulchral  honours  on  individuals,  most  of  whom  had  certainly  no  title,  and 
probably  no  desire,  to  live  anywhere  beyond  the  grave  but  in  heaven  and  the  memory  of 
their  friends.  On  casting  one's  eye  over  this  pompous  burial-ground,  one  might  imagine 
that  it  was  the  chosen  cemetery  of  the  warriors  and  sages  of  the  world,  instead  of  the  peace- 
ful and  plodding  dealers  and  chapmen  of  a  provincial  town. 

In  a  corner  of  the  church-yard,  a  little  detached  from  this  crowd  of  ambitious 
trophies,  stands  the  tomb  of  Burns,  a  plain  flat  stone,  raised  on  supporters  a  little  above 
the  ground,  with  his  name,  age,  and  the  time  of  his  death  inscribed  upon  it,  together  with 
those  of  two  of  his  sons,  who  lie  buried  with  him.  A  subscription  for  a  more  splendid  and 
suitable  monument  for  him  was  just  set  on  foot  when  I  was  at  Dumfries.  I  have  not 
been  so  much  gratified  by  any  privilege  in  the  course  of  writing  this  voyage  as  by  the 
opportunity  which  I  now  have  of  publicly  expressing  my  affection  and  admiration  for  the 
memory  of  this  extraordinary  man.  No  person  perhaps  has  more  signally  proved  how 
genius  is  consecrated  by  the  grave — no  one,  when  he  could  claim  that  melancholy  in- 
terest which  we  feel  for  those  that  are  gone,  was  ever  the  subject  of  more  general  pity  and 
regard.  I  say  pity,  for  that  I  think  is  the  prevailing  feeling  that  mixes  with  our  recol- 
lections of  him :  we  must  reverence  his  genius,  but  it  is  his  genius  joined  with  the  softer 
and  more  simple  qualities  of  our  common  nature,  and  with  his  large  share  of  the  familiar 
sufferings  of  man,  that  peculiarly  endears  him  to  us — his  passion,  his  tenderness,  and  his 
sociability ;  the  miseries  of  his  ill-directed  life,  and  his  premature  death.  Few  travellers 
pass  through  Dumfries  who  have  not  some  sentiment  to  gratify  in  visiting  his  grave. 
When  the  mail  stops  there  at  night,  it  is  a  common  thing  to  see  the  passengers  hurrying 
with  a  lantern  to  his  humble  grave,  all  pleased  to  pluck  a  blade  or  two  of  grass  from  the 
sod  that  covers  him.  His  widow,  so  familiar  to  all  who  read  his  poetry,  still  lives  at 

Dumfries 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  189 

Dumfries  in  the  same  house  where  he  resided,  and  which  his  name  now  makes  interesting, 
though  there  so  lately,  neglected  and  degraded,  he  groaned  under  the  base  drudgery  to 
which  his  patrons  had  subjected  him. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  conversing  here  with  several  people  who  had  been  on  terms  of 
intimacy  with  him,  and  had  often  seen  him  in  those  convivial  hours  so  fatal  to  his  happi- 
ness, but  in  which  all  the  vigour  and  brilliancy  of  his  wit  and  his  romantic  fancy  were 
warmed  into  action.  He  was  much  liked  in  the  town  for  his  social  disposition  and  many 
amiable  qualities ;  but  his  acquaintance,  particularly  of  the  humbler  order,  stood  somewhat 
in  awe  of  him,  for  he  was  very  apt  to  be  satirical,  and  sometimes  employed  the  energies  of 
his  superior  mind  in  mortifying  and  humbling  those  who  offered  him  no  provocation  but 
their  helplessness.  In  parties  where  he  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  constrain  himself  by 
any  forms  of  politeness,  he  usually  selected  a  but,  whom  he  played  upon  without  mercy, 
and  often  with  great  coarseness  of  raillery,  but  edged  with  such  keenness,  and  seasoned 
with  such  irresistible  humour  and  vivacity,  that  there  was  only  one  of  the  company  that 
could  listen  to  him  without  delight.  He  was  remarkable,  as  is  well  known,  for  his  bold 
and  animating  flow  of  language;  and  his  eloquence,  though  often  coarse,  rather  gained  in 
vehemence  and  volubility,  from  his  disdain  of  all  critical  rules  of  taste  and  propriety.  He 
had  a  high  reputation  for  this  rich  gift  even  amongst  his  lowest  associates  ;  and  indeed  it  is 
doubted  whether  his  power  of  language  was  not  most  strikingly  illustrated,  when  he  con- 
versed in  the  broadest  and  most  unmixed  dialect  of  his  country.  I  met  with  a  publican 
not  far  from  Dumfries,  a  shrewd  intelligent  fellow,  who  had  been  one  of  the  boon  com- 
panions of  Burns,  and  gave  me  a  strong  idea  of  his  wonderful  strength  of  expression.  No 
one,  he  observed,  could  stand  against  him  ;  he  could  make  any  one  appear  ridiculous,  and 
had  a  power  of  retort  that  was  terrible.  On  the  whole,  however,  he  was  good  humoured 
and  affable,  known  to  be  kind  and  compassionate  at  heart,  and  was  so  much  the  patron  of 
convivial  meetings  that  he  made  no  lasting  enemies. 

Dumfries  being  the  largest  and  most  respectable  town  in  the  south  of  Scotland,  is  the 
winter  residence  of  many  families  of  note  from  the  surrounding  country.  Amongst  its 
establishments  for  gaiety  and  amusement  it  numbers  a  theatre,  but  a  small  one,  and  by 
no  means  suited  to  the  general  elegance  that  is  observable  in  the  buildings  of  the  place,  for 
the  drama  is  not  very  liberally  patronized  in  Scotland.  The  town  is  little  distinguished  as 
a  place  of  trade,  though  a  considerable  quantity  of  hats  and  stockings  are  made  in  it,  and 
sold  to  chapmen  from  various  parts  of  the  country.  It  is  principally  enriched  by  the 
great  fairs  for  black  cattle  and  pigs  that  are  held  in  it,  immense  flocks  arriving  weekly 
from  Ayrshire  and  Galloway  on  their  waj*  to  the  English  markets.  A  few  vessels  belong 
to  the  port,  which  bring  in  coals,  lime,  groceries,  &c.  and  carry  away  grain,  timber,  and  a 
few  manufactured  goods.  Vessels  of  small  burthen  can  approach  within  a  short  distance 
of  the  town;  but  the  larger  vessels  bound  to  the  port  discharge  their  cargoes  a  little  below 
the  mouth  of  the  river. 

There 


190  VOV'AGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

There  are  two  bridges  over  the  Nith  at  Dumfries,  close  to  each  other,  one  of  t.hem  of 
great  antiquity,  and  very  singularly  constructed.  There  is  no  record  of  the  period  of  its 
foundation,  but  it  was  evidently  built  when  the  science  of  engineering  was  in  its  infancy. 
It  had  formerly  nine  arches,  but  there  are  now  only  eight,  which  are  of  very  unequal  sizes, 
not  diminishing  from  the  centre  towards  the  extremities,  but  placed  irregularly,  some 
circular  and  some  pointed,  the  largest  occupying  the  west  end,  and  the  least  the  east. 
The  space  between  the  parapets  is  so  narrow  that  it  will  not  admit  two  carriages  abreast. 
This  bridge  is  curious  from  its  antiquity,  but  it  is  now  of  no  use,  and  is  rather  an  unsightly 
object,  interfering  with  the  effect  of  the  new  bridge,  which  is  a  very  handsome  structure, 
•with  five  elliptical  arches,  and  a  fine  broad  road. 

I  left  Dumfries  on  a  Sunday,  and  was  amused  on  my  road  by  a  droll  exhibition 
of  Scottish  economy  among  the  lasses,  who  were  flocking  from  the  neighbouring  villages 
and  farms  to  the  kirk.  They  were  mostly  very  gaily  attired,  but  had  all  their  shoes  and 
stockings  off,  which  they  carried  wrapped  up  in  their  handkerchiefs,  and  would  not  put 
on  till  the  moment  before  their  entrance  into  the  town.  From  this  notable  expedient 
there  obviously  results  a  most  important  saving  in  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  articles,  besides 
the  advantage  of  preserving  them  unsoiled  till  the  instant  of  public  exhibition — and  all 
this  at  no  expense  of  ease  or  comfort,  for  these  hardy  damsels  consider  shoes  and  stockings 
as  things  of  mere  ornament,  and  rather  encumbrances  than  otherwise  to  those  who  walk. 
I  observed  that  some  of  them,  and  some  of  the  smartest  too,  were  altogether  without  them, 
and  these  would  flaunt  into  Dumfries  without  fear  or  danger  of  ridicule,  though  the  eye 
of  an  Englishman  was  not  much  less  startled  by  their  appearance  than  it  might  have  been 
had  he  seen  gentlemen  straying  in  the  streets  without  their  breeches.  When  engaged  in 
their  ordinary  occupations,  and  dressed  in  coarse  and  suitable  garments,  their  bare  legs 
and  feet  do  very  well,  and  a  lover  of  the  picturesque  might  probably  prefer  them,  rough, 
dirty,  and  weather-beaten  as  they  are,  to  shoes  and  stockings ;  but  nothing  can  be  more 
ridiculous  than  the  effect  of  them  when  seen  in  a  person  who  is  just  fresh  from  the  cares  of 
her  toilet,  and  in  every  other  respect  studiously  ornamented.  Here  you  may  see  a  lady 
with  a  white  gown,  a  silk  shawl  or  spencer,  and  a  straw  bonnet  with  artificial  flowers  in 
it,  nay,  with  gloves  on  too,  and  all  this  finery  terminated  by  a  huge  pair  of  bare,  begrimed 
legs  and  feet,  which  look  as  if  they  could  scarcely  belong  to  her.  The  legs  and  feet,  from 
exposure  to  wet,  and  cold,  and  the  sun,  become  red  and  puffy,  resembling  in  surface  and 
colour  a  great  over-grown  radish,  most  unfortunately  set  off  certainly  when  seen  peeping 
from  beneath  a  white  muslin  gown.  So  violent  an  incongruity  is  as  if 


-turpiter  atrum 


Desinat  in  piscem  tnulier  formosa  supern£. 

Or  if  this  should  be  thought  too  strained  a  comparison,  and  we  cannot  say  either  to  the 
very  letter — 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  191 

ut  nee  pes,  nee  caput  uni 

Reddatur  formae ; — 

the  most  partial  judge  must  admit  that  there  is  a  direct  and  inexcusable  deviation  from 
that  valuable  rule  which  is  given  as  a  caution  against  such  monstrous  associations  : 

Denique  sit,  quod  vis,  simplex  duntaxat  et  unum. 

These  Scottish  lasses  might  shelter  themselves  perhaps  from  the  sarcasms  of  the 
Roman  satirist,  under  the  authority  of  the  ladies  of  ancient  Greece,  who  certainly  did 
not  wear  stockings;  but  those  models  of  beauty  and  grace,  in  every  point  of  natural  form, 
and  in  every  art  of  decoration,  were  much  in  the  habit  of  washing  the  legs  which  they  did 
not  hesitate  to  expose,  and  it  may  be  questioned  whether  they  had  not  altogether  a  dif- 
ferent description  of  legs  from  those  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  For  my  part,  if  I  was 
ready  to  concede  that  bare  legs  had  not  certain  vulgar  associations  to  contend  against 
that  render  them  scarcely  reconcileable  with  muslin  gowns,  gloves,  and  other  finery,  I 
should  still  plead  for  stockings  in  behalf  of  our  cotton  manufacturers ;  and  I  am  sure  that 
the  poor  stocking-weavers  of  Dumfries  will  heartily  go  along  with  me  in  my  animadver- 
sions upon  the  nudipedes  of  this  neighbourhood,  and  see  the  whole  impropriety  either  of 
their  being  without  stockings  altogether  or  carrying  them  in  their  pocket  handkerchiefs. 

A  few  miles  below  Dumfries  stands  New  Abbey,  which  retains  enough  of  its  original 
beauty  and  magnificence  to  give  a  melancholy  interest  to  its  ruins.     Nothing  remains  but 
the  church,  which  was  a  noble  structure  built  of  red  freestone  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and 
in  that  sumptuous  style  of  Gothic  architecture  that  prevailed  in  the  reign  of  Edward  the 
Third.     It  has  no  roof,  and  the  lateral  walls  are  destroyed,  but  the  nave  and  choir  still  re- 
main; and  though  much  shattered  and  sadly  mutilated  in  all  their  ornaments,  still  present 
a  grand  perspective  of  highly  pointed   arches   and   lofty  clustered  columns   of  great 
beauty  and  elegance,  firm  and  substantial,  but  light  and  graceful  in  the  highest  degree. 
The  whole  length  of  the  building  from  east  to  west  is  two  hundred  feet,  and  the  breadth 
of  the  nave  twenty-five  feet.     Six  arches  on  each  side  divide  the  nave  from  the  aisles:  the 
choir  occupies  the  area  of  the  tower,  which  rests  on  four  arches  of  vast  magnitude.     At 
the  east  and  west  ends  are  two  magnificent  windows  filled  with  tracery,  which  take  up 
nearly  the  whole  breadth  of  the  nave,  and  reached  to  the  vaulting.     The  transepts  are 
standing,  and  are  very  elegant.     On  each  side  of  the  choir  is  a  very  small  chapel  with  a 
stone  roof,  vaulted  and  divided  into  four  compartments  by  two  intersecting  ribs.     There 
is  not  a  single  monument  in  any  part  of  the  church.     Not  the  slightest  care  is  taken  to 
preserve  this  beautiful  ruin  from  the  invasion  of  the  mischievous,  or  to  keep  it  free  from 
the  most  offensive  nuisances,  and  it  is  consequently  in  many  parts  in  a  very  beastly  con- 
dition.    About  half  a  century  ago  it  was  bought  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  stone,  and  the 
Vandal  of  a  purchaser  had  actually  begun  to  pull  it  down,  when  he  was  stopped  in  his 
unhallowed  work  by  some  gentlemen  of  the  country,  who  redeemed  it  from  his  hands  for  a 

small 


192  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

small  sum  raised  by  subscription.  It  were  to  be  wished  that  some  gracious  mediators 
would  interfere  to  defend  it  from  the  irreverent  usage  to  which  it  is  now  subjected. 

A  small  modern  church  is  now  a  part  of  the  ancient  building,  one  of  its  sides  being 
formed  by  the  wall  of  the  southern  aisle.  Service  was  being  performed  when  I  was  on  the 
spot,  and  as  I  wandered  through  the  grass-grown  aisles  of  this  once  splendid  fabric,  I 
could  distinguish  the  voice  of  the  preacher  from  the  little  lowly  church  that  has  risen  upon 
its  ruins,  and  it  quickened,  it  will  not  be  doubted,  those  solemn  reflections  on  the  revolu- 
tions of  society  that  the  fallen  and  faded  grandeur  around  me  inspired. 

The  abbey  was  founded  late  in  the  twelfth  century  by  Devorgilla,  daughter  to  Alan, 
Lord  of  Galloway,  and  wife  of  John  Baliol,  Lord  of  Castle-Bernard.  On  the  death  of 
her  husband  this  pious  lady  embalmed  his  heart,  and  deposited  it  in  an  ivory  case  bound 
with  silver,  which  she  fixed  in  the  walls  of  the  church  near  the  high  altar.  In  commemo- 
ration of  this  act  of  reverence  and  affection  the  building  was  called  Sweetheart  Abbey, 
but  in  the  course  of  time  lost  this  tender  title  and  assumed  that  of  New  Abbey. 

I  proceeded  from  hence  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Nith  skirting  the  base  of  Criffel, 
which  rose  with  great  majesty  to  my  right.  This  mountain  rises  abruptly  from  its  base  to 
its  summit,  but  has  a  smooth  surface  covered  with  heath.  When  seen  from  the  plain  it 
appears  to  taper  to  a  point,  but  there  is  a  flat  peat-moss  on  its  very  summit  of  considerable 
extent.  At  its  base  is  a  small  lake  well  stocked  with  trout  and  other  fish.  Seamen  have 
reported  that  from  some  distance  at  sea,  a  bright  spot  is  often  to  be  seen  high  up  this 
mountain,  which  shines  like  a  diamond,  and  no  doubt  is  one,  they  say,  sufficient  to  make 
the  fortunes  of  any  twenty  who  may  have  the  luck  to  find  it.  But  the  perverse  jewel 
mocks  pursuit,  and  though  it  has  been  the  object  of  many  an  anxious  search,  never  shews 
itself  but  to  tantalize  the  distant  observer. 

Crossing  a  narrow  swampy  tract  which  lies  between  the  base  of  Criffel  and  the  sea, 
I  arrived  at  Carsethorn,  a  small  village  a  little  below  the  mouth  of  the  Nith,  consisting  of 
a  few  mean  houses  for  the  reception  of  bathers.  I  found  the  best  inn  poor  and  dirty,  full 
of  tobacco  smoke  and  the  reek  of  whisky-punch,  but  ill  provided  with  every  comfort  that 
a  traveller  looks  for  after  a  long  walk,  unless  indeed  tobacco  and  whisk}'  be  the  consum- 
mation of  all  his  desires.  I  met  with  extreme  civility,  however,  which,  if  it  will  not  exactly 
appease  a  hungry  stomach,  tends  to  make  a  man  bear  it  with  patience  and  good  humour. 
I  was  asked  here  whether  I  chose  to  sleep  in  sheets  or  blankets,  a  question  which  really 
sounded  not  much  less  preposterous  to  me,  than  if  I  had  been  asked  whether  I  chose  to 
eat  my  meat  raw  or  roasted.  The  same  question  was  proposed  to  me  in  many  other 
places  during  my  tour  in  Scotland,  so  that  I  suppose  there  actually  are  found  people,  even 
in  the  king's  European  dominions,  who  choose  the  blankets. 

On  rising  in  the  morning  at  this  place  I  was  quite  charmed  with  the  magnificence  of 
the  prospect  that  I  beheld  from  my  window,  comprehending  the  whole  length  of  the 
Solway  Firth,  with  both  its  coasts,  which  the  eye  embraced  as  component  parts  of  one 

vast 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  1Q3 

vast  landscape— the  Scottish  side  clearly  marked  in  all  its  variety  of  hill  and  valley,  corn- 
fields, meadows,  and  woodlands,  and  the  English  border  distinguishable  only  in  a  few 
scattered  eminences  which  resembled  islands,  but  with  the  mountains  towering  most 
sublimely  in  the  farthest  distance, — the  general  forms  of  their  multiplied  summits  distinct, 
but  soft  and  shadowy  through  the  medium  of  a  blue  misty  atmosphere.  The  Firth  lay 
extended  in  an  immense  desert  of  sand,  warmed  by  a  golden  hue  from  the  broad  and 
level  beams  of  the  sun,  which  had  not  yet  mounted  far  above  the  horizon.  The  figures  of 
some  shrimpers  appeared  far  remote  on  this  wide  plain,  looming  up  as  if  they  trod  in  air; 
here  and  there  was  a  flock  of  gulls,  enlarged  to  a  monstrous  size,  and  occasionally  a  solitary 
heron  sprung  with  a  piercing  scream  from  its  marshy  borders. 

I  was  warned  before  I  left  this  village  that  I  had  a  very  rough  journey  before  me,  and 
must  make  huts  my  resting-places,  and  such  food  as  huts  afford  my  fare,  for  several 
days.  Had  I  been  prudent  I  might  have  provided  against  the  mcagerness  and  coarseness 
of  hut  diet,  by  laying  in  stock  at  Dumfries,  though  really  one  finds  so  much  moral  refine- 
ment and  cultivation  in  the  huts  of  Scotland,  that  I  should  have  hesitated  to  wound  the 
pride  of  the  people  by  a  display  of  precautions  suited  to  the  interior  of  Africa.  A  little 
hardship  too  gives  dignity  and  interest  to  a  man's  travels,  or  if  it  cannot  be  admitted  that 
there  is  either  dignity  or  interest  in  eating  oat-cake  and  sitting  up  to  one's  knees  in  dirt, 
it  must  be  granted  that  such  trials  have  their  use  in  making  a  man,  after  all  is  over,  more 
acutely  sensible  of  the  value  of  loaves  and  clean  floors,  and  giving  the  piquancy  of  luxuries 
to  the  most  ordinary  comforts  and  indulgences.  I  had  moreover  been  well  seasoned  in 
Wales  by  a  long  course  of  experience  in  all  the  ways  of  dirt,  so  that  I  started  on  my 
journey  to  meet  my  threatened  sufferings  with  a  reasonable  confidence  in  my  hardihood 
and  patience. 

About  a  mile  to  the  southward  of  Carsethorn,  a  low  ledge  of  rocks  appears  along  the 
shore,  the  first  that  I  had  observed  on  the  borders  of  the  Solway  Firth.  On  rounding  a 
point  a  little  further  south  a  beautiful  bank  presents  itself  as  the  boundary  of  the  sea, 
with  a  very  steep  front  broken  in  places  by  projecting  masses  of  rock,  and  clothed  nearly 
down  to  the  water's  edge  with  oak  and  ash  trees,  many  of  which,  in  spite  of  their  exposure 
to  the  sea-winds,  have  attained  a  considerable  size.  On  the  summit  of  this  bank  near  the 
north  end  I  observed  one  of  those  ancient  fortifications  called  Moats,  which  occur  so 
frequently  on  the  coasts  of  Scotland.  It  consists  of  a  low  circular  mount,  surrounded  by 
a  ditch  except  in  one  part  where  it  terminates  at  the  edge  of  the  precipice  above  the  sea. 
The  area  of  the  summit  is  flat,  and  not  more  than  eighteen  yards  in  diameter.  It  is  dif- 
ficult to  conceive  in  what  system  of  warfare  this  tiny  fort  could  have  been  of  any  service 
to  the  natives  of  the  country.  It  commands  a  view  of  a  very  small  extent  of  coast,  and 
could  therefore  not  have  been  designed  for  a  post  of  observation,  neither  does  it  guard 
any  creek  or  landing-place.  A  small  party  of  men  might  have  defended  themselves  on  it 
against  a  large  force,  but  they  might  speedily  have  been  starved  into  submission,  and  there 

VOL.  ii.  c  c  was 


194  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

was  not  room  enough  upon  it  as  a  place  of  security  for  any  considerable  number  of  people, 
or  for  cattle  during  a  moment  of  sudden  alarm ;  besides  that  a  refuge  of  this  sort  would 
have  been  placed  in  the  interior,  as  far  from  the  reach  of  invaders  as  possible.  There 
never  was  any  kind  of  building  upon  the  mount,  nor  any  provision  for  water,  so  that  for 
whatever  purposes  it  was  used,  they  must  have  been  very  transient.  Some  have  supposed 
that  these  small  fortifications  were  not  raised  by  the  natives  but  by  their  invaders,  as 
strong  holds  in  which  they  might  leave  a  few  men  to  guard  their  boats  while  they  scoured 
the  country  for  booty.  But  to  the  reasonableness  of  this  conjecture  may  be  opposed  the 
appearance  of  so  many  of  these  moats  quite  entire,  for  on  the  retreat  of  an  enemy,  the 
first  act  of  the  inhabitants  would  undoubtedly  have  been  to  destroy  every  work  that  could 
give  facility  to  their  operations  in  another  attack. 

As  I  proceeded  south  from  the  moat  I  was  struck  with  the  sixe  of  some  of  the  trees 
that  grew  on  the  bank  to  my  left,  stretching  their  branches  over  the  sea  and  exposing 
their  bare  roots  to  the  spray.  These  wonders  are  on  the  estate  of  Mr.  Craig,  whose  house, 
surrounded  by  a  large  and  thriving  plantation,  stands  at  a  short  distance  from  the  shore. 
This  gentleman  is  noted  in  this  part  of  the  country  for  the  extent  of  his  agricultural  im- 
provements, and  the  fine  trees  that  he  has  reared  in  a  situation  so  unfriendly  to  their 
growth  are  conspicuous  proofs  of  his  skill.  His  estate  exhibited  the  last  beauties  of  cul- 
tivation that!  was  to  see  for  some  time,  the  country  farther  westward  assuming  a  character 
that  bids  defiance  to  the  art  of  man.  The  wooded  bank  soon  terminates,  the  coast  at  its 
south  end  receding  into  a  sandy  bay,  opening  in  front  into  a  bleak  naked  country,  and 
bounded  to  the  south  by  Salturness  Point  a  low  reef  of  rocks  jutting  far  into  the  sea,  and 
covered  with  a  black  grove  of  firs.  Near  the  point  is  a  small  village,  which  I  found  full  of 
poor  invalids  who  had  come  from  various  parts  of  the  country  for  the  benefit  of  sea-bath- 
ing. A  few  miserable  creatures  were  pacing  about  upon  the  sands,  and  their  woeful 
figures,  with  the  dreariness  of  this  wild  bay,  composed  a  very  melancholy  picture,  the 
more  impressive  from  its  contrast  to  the  rich  gay  country  from  which  I  had  but  just  taken 
my  eye. 

At  Salturness  Point  the  coast  makes  a  sharp  angle,  and  stretches  to  the  westward  in  a 
range  of  sand-hills,  which  spread  out  to  a  considerable  depth,  and  when  seen  in  long  perspec- 
tive from  the  point,  have  a  most  wild  and  dreary  aspect.  A  prodigious  quantity  of  sand 
has  been  accumulated  at  this  extremity  of  the  Firth;  the  tides  here,  in  consequence  of  the 
increased  breadth  of  the  strait,  running  with  less  violence  and  allowing  the  sand  to  settle, 
which  is  born  down  by  the  various  rivers  that  discharge  themselves  into  it.  Between 
Salturness  and  the  mouth  of  the  Orr,  a  vast  bank  runs  out  more  than  two  miles  from  the 
shore,  and  forms  a  terrible  obstruction  in  the  way  of  navigation.  At  half  ebb  almost  the 
whole  of  it  is  dry,  and  there  is  not  sufficient  water  over  it,  at  any  time  of  tide,  for  vessels 
drawing  more  than  four  or  five  feet.  There  is  a  lighthouse  on  Salturness  Point,  which 
warns  vessels  of  the  position  of  this  shoal,  and  it  is  indicated  too  by  the  breakers  that  are 

constantly 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BBITAItf.  195 

constantly  bursting  upon  it ;  but  in  gales  from  the  south,  the  most  furious  that  blow, 
vessels  entering  the  Firth  from  the  westward  have  this  dreadful  bank  to  leeward  of  them, 
and  many  are  wrecked  upon  it  in  spite  of  every  precaution. 

To  the  westward  of  Salturness  a  total  change  takes  place  in  the  whole  form  and 
character  of  the  inland  country ;  the  cultivated  fields  that  I  had  hitherto  seen  bordering 
the  shores  of  the  Firth,  giving  way  to  a  chain  of  lofty,  rude,  barren  hills,  which  extends 
from  Criffel  to  the  utmost  visible  distance  to  the  westward.  When  travelling  along  the 
Cumberland  coast  I  had  often  admired  the  bold  and  picturesque  outline  of  this  long  ser- 
rated range  of  hills,  and  they  appeared  to  still  more  advantage  on  a  nearer  view,  when 
seen  in  their  real  magnitude  and  under  the  various  colouring  of  rock,  and  heath,  and  wood. 
In  point  of  height  they  may  almost  claim  the  dignity  of  mountains,  and  they  have  a  per- 
fect resemblance  to  them  in  character  and  expression,  in  their  ruggedness  and  abruptness, 
and  in  the  savage  grandeur  of  the  rocks  on  their  broken  summits.  About  two  miles  west 
of  Salturness  these  hills,  terminating  in  bold  abrupt  cliffs,  bound  the  sea-shore,  but  at  the 
head  of  the  range  a  singular  peninsula,  as  flat  as  the  sands  of  the  sea,  lies  at  their  base, 
jutting  into  the  Firth  in  a  semicircle  about  two  miles  broad  in  the  broadest  part.  This 
flat  is  composed  entirely  of  sand,  and  from  this  circumstance,  and  the  discovery  of  various 
marine  remains  upon  it,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  it  was  once  covered  by  the  sea. 
It  is  bounded  too  by  a  line  of  broken  and  precipitous  cliffs,  which  have  evidently  been 
exposed  to  the  battering  of  the  waves.  The  retreat  of  the  sea  from  this  tract  took  place 
very  recently  (geologically  speaking),  for  among  other  proofs  of  its  former  submersion,  I 
was  informed  that  an  anchor  was  lately  discovered  under  the  sand.  No  great  benefit  has 
hitherto  been  derived  from  the  recovered  land,  the  greater  part  of  it  being  an  open  com- 
mon, scantily  covered  with  short  dry  grass;  but  a  portion  of  it  has  been  inclosed,  and  forced 
by  abundant  manuring  into  more  fertility. 

From  Salturness  I  turned  my  steps  inland,  and  proceeded  across  the  flat  till  I  came 
to  the  ruins  of  an  old  castle,  called  the  Reas,  built  by  an  Earl  of  Moreton.  There  are 
only  a  few  fragments  of  the  walls  standing,  the  greater  part  having  been  lately  pulled 
down,  and  the  materials  employed  to  make  stone  dykes  for  enclosures.  The  building  was 
very  small,  consisting  only  of  a  single  square  tower,  rudely  put  together,  but  remarkable 
for  its  strength,  the  most  valuable  property  no  doubt  of  a  gentleman's  house  at  the  time 
that  this  was  built.  A  farmer  lives  in  a  small  house  close  to  the  ruins,  who  told  me  that 
in  taking  down  one  side  of  the  castle  a  cavity  was  discovered  in  the  walls,  in  which  were 
lodged  a  quantity  of  human  bones.  There  have  not  been  wanting,  of  course,  stories  of 
blood  and  murder  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  such  remains  so  carefully  concealed 
in  such  a  place,  and  as  there  is  no  circumstance  known  in  the  history  of  the  castle  that 
throws  any  light  on  the  mystery,  every  one  is  at  liberty  to  frame  what  conjectures  he 
pleases.  One  is  not  a  little  indignant  at  seeing  an  old  building  like  this  pulled  down  for 
the  sake  of  the  coarse  stones  of  which  it  was  composed,  while  the  hills  at  the  distance  of 

c  c  2  half 


196  VOYAGE    ROUND   GREAT    BRITAIN. 

half  a  mile  would  furnish  stones  enough,  all  loose  and  portable,  to  build  a  city  with. 
There  is  not  much  cause  for  wonder  or  reproach  in  the  conduct  of  the  thrifty  farmer,  who 
valuing  the  castle  for  nothing  but  its  materials,  thought  it  advisable  to  turn  them  to  some 
account,  but  it  might  have  been  hoped  that  some  one  with  feelings  less  dull  and  limited 
would  have  interposed  to  save  it  from  destruction.  It  had  no  grandeur  or  beauty  about 
it,  and  was  not  memorable  as  the  scene  of  any  illustrious  actions,  but  it  was  interesting 
merely  from  its  antiquity,  and  as  a  memorial  of  times  gone  by,  was  the  more  curious 
from  its  rudeness  and  its  contrast  with  the  habitations  of  the  great  and  wealthy  of  the 
present  day. 

I  was  driven  from  hence  by  a  sudden  and  violent  rain  which,  interrupting  me  in  my 
day's  inarch,  while  I  was  yet  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  place  that  I  had  fixed 
upon  as  its  boundary,  sent  me  for  shelter  to  a  neighbouring  hamlet,  called  (I  could  not 
ascertain  why)  Man's  Riddle.  There  was  a  small  public  house  in  it  open  to  receive  me, 
which,  had  it  been  far  more  unprepossessing  than  I  found  it,  I  must  of  necessity  have  sub- 
mitted to.  On  entering  a  house  of  no  greater  promise  externally  in  England,  a  wet 
traveller  would  bustle  to  the  fire,  and  brightening  up  in  the  anticipation  of  refreshment, 
would  rub  his  hands  and  briskly  ask,  "  Now,  what  can  I  have  for  dinner?"  But  I  asked  no 
such  question  here,  being  thoroughly  convinced  that  though  I  might  choose  to  dine,  I  could 
have  no  choice  of  dinner.  That,  however,  which  I  had  here  as  a  matter  of  destiny,  though 
very  humble,  was  so  civilly  put  before  me,  and  the  manners  of  the  people  were  so  friendly 
and  cordial,  that  I  was  absolutely  obliged  to  feel  content.  I  was  pleased  with  the  sim- 
plicity of  my  host,  who,  not  imagining  that  I  had  the  smallest  cause  of  complaint,  brought 
me  some  oat-cake  and  butter,  and  a  mutchkin  of  whisk}',  observing,  as  if  he  had  set  before 
me  a  feast  for  a  prince, — "  There,  Sir,  sit  you  doon  and  fill  yoursel."  The  oat-cake  as 
made  in  Scotland  is  a  very  coarse  kind  of  bread,  and  I  often  found  it  so  rank  and  bitter, 
that  with  every  disposition  lo  make  the  best  of  things,  I  could  scarcely  consent  to  swallow 
it.  At  least  one  third  of  the  husk  of  the  grain  is  mixed  up  in  the  cake,  so  that  when 
baked  hard  it  has  a  surface  like  a  file,  and  proves  very  offensive  to  gums  not  properly 
seasoned.  I  know  not  whether  it  be  from  this  quality  of  roughness  that  it  has  an  un- 
pleasant effect  on  the  bowels  of  those  unaccustomed  to  such  rugged  food.  Yet,  coarse  as 
it  is,  this  is  the  bread  which  the  majority  of  the  people  of  Scotland  are  content  to  eat,  and 
I  have  often  heard  it  contended  amongst  them,  that  it  is  not  less  palatable  and  far  more 
nutritious  than  wheaten  bread.  Labouring  people  have  told  me  that  if  they  had  a  severe 
day's  toil  to  go  through,  and  had  their  choice  between  oaten  and  wheaten  bread,  they 
should  prefer  the  former  as  best  calculated  to  sustain  their  strength.  I  am  not  at  all  dis- 
posed to  despise  such  authority,  yet  I  cannot  consent  to  give  up  my  English  prejudices 
in  favour  of  wheat,  which  is  undoubtedly  a  more  glutinous  grain  than  oats,  and  therefore, 
I  imagine,  decidedly  more  nutritious.  If  it  be  true  that  an  oat-cake  as  made  in  this 
country  would  give  more  substantial  support  to  a  man  than  an  equal  weight  of  wheaten 

bread, 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  197 

bread,  there  must  be  a  great  difference  indeed  in  the  quality  of  the  two  grains,  for  the 
husk  that  is  mixed  so  plentifully  in  the  cake  is  not  to  be  digested  by  a  stomach  weaker 
than  that  of  an  ostrich. 

It  was  a  stormy  morning  when  I  started  again  on  my  journey,  and  the  gloom  of 
the  sky  gave  character  and  effect  to  the  rude  grandeur  of  the  country.  The  sea, 
raised  by  a  strong  gale  from  the  south,  was  bursting  in  tiers  of  breakers  upon  the  sand- 
banks ;  the  wind  was  roaring  amongst  the  bending  woods  on  the  sides  of  the  hills,  and 
the  driving  scud  whirling  in  rapid  eddies  about  their  summits.  I  followed  the  public 
road,  which,  though  carried  over  a  rugged  tract,  is  an  excellent  one,  and  gives  the  traveller, 
together  with  the  pleasure  of  ease  in  his  progress,  as  fine  views  of  the  scenery  of  the 
country  as  he  could  select.  About  a  mile  from  Man's  Riddle  stands  a  small  elegant 
house,  the  seat  of  General  Dunlop,  shrouded  in  the  gloom  of  a  thick  wood,  with  a  rapid 
burn  foaming  before  it,  and  overhung  by  the  rocky  summits  of  tremendous  hills — a  situa- 
tion of  the  most  romantic  wildness  and  seclusion  that  can  be  imagined.  After  crossing 
the  burn  the  road  ascends  and  is  carried  along  the  face  of  a  hill  which  rises  to  a  great  height 
to  the  right  of  it,  its  summit  abrupt  and  craggy,  and  to  the  left  descends  to  the  flat  in 
a  broken  and  rocky  precipice  hung  with  ivy,  and  tufted  with  coppice  wood.  A  little 
farther  on  the  flat  terminates,  and  the  sea  flows  up  to  the  base  of  the  precipice.  The 
scenery  here  reminded  me  of  some  of  the  wild  beauties  of  Caernarvonshire.  To  the  right 
the  eye  was  prevented  from  roaming  by  a  vast  barrier  of  hills,  covered,  saving  their  savage 
tops,  with  dark  masses  of  wood,  and  to  the  left  was  a  raging  sea,  whose  roar  was  the  chief 
sound  that  broke  upon  the  solitude.  Half  a  mile  further  west  the  road  descends  into  a 
deep  and  narrow  valley,  opening  into  a  small  bay,  and  enclosed  on  three  sides  by  an 
amphitheatre  of  hills,  their  sides  and  every  glen  and  hollow  amongst  them  still  clothed 
with  wood,  and  their  summits  towering  up,  peak  beyond  peak,  in  masses  of  naked  rock. 
On  the  west  side  of  the  valley,  close  to  the  sea,  is  a  small  village,  of  a  rudeness,  which, 
for  the  sake  of  its  agreement  with  the  surrounding  scenery,  one  would  not  wish  to  see 
softened. 

Passing  the  village  I  soon  lost  sight  of  the  sea,  and  entered  a  valley  of  peat-moss, 
bounded  by  dark  barren  hills,  which  on  the  south  side  descend  so  rapidly  to  the  sea  that 
the  road  could  not  be  continued  along  their  front.  Following  the  road  for  about  two 
miles  through  this  dreary  valley,  I  came  to  a  small  village  on  the  border  of  a  dismal  lake, 
enclosed  all  round  by  bare  and  shattered  rocks.  There  was  something  so  gloomy  and 
horridly  cheerless  in  the  situation  of  this  village,  that  I  did  not  pass  it  without  a  sigh  for 
its  poor  inhabitants,  though  I  soon  took  comfort  on  adverting  to  that  love  of  soil,  or  rock, 
as  it  must  be  here,  which  grows  up  in  every  man  wherever  he  may  have  happened  to 
be  born  and  bred.  Near  the  lake  I  turned  into  a  lane  that  led  me  down  to  the  shore  at 
the  mouth  of  the  water  of  Orr,  a  considerable  river,  which  discharges  itself  into  the  sea 
through  a  wide  opening  between  the  hills,  at  high  water  filled  by  the  tide.  At  its  mouth 

this 


198  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BKITAIJf. 

this  inlet  is  two  miles  in  breadth,  but  a  little  within  it  a  lofty  ridge  of  rocks  juts  out  into 
the  channel,  and  divides  the  Orr  from  the  bay  of  Belcarry,  which  penetrates  deep  into  the 
country  on  the  western  side  of  the  promontory.  The  hills  which  enclose  the  Orr  have  an 
Alpine  grandeur  and  rudeness,  and  the  whole  scenery  of  the  estuary,  under  the  incidental 
effect  given  to  it  by  a  dark  sky  and  a  tempestuous  sea,  was  magnificently  wild.  Just 
within  the  entrance,  near  the  west  point,  is  a  small  island  called  Hasten  Isle,  which  was 
now  almost  buried  under  the  foam  of  the  sea. 

I  scrambled  for  a  mile  or  two  over  a  rocky  broken  path  along  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Orr,  till  I  came  to  Cap  Ford,  a  small  village  inhabited  by  shipwrights,  who  build  small 
craft  for  coasters  and  fishermen.  The  larger  vessels  that  enter  the  Orr  discharge  their 
cargoes  at  this  place,  but  sloops  from  fifty  to  a  hundred  tons  burthen  can  proceed 
four  or  five  miles  higher  up  the  river.  I  was  now  in  a  very  rude  and  unfrequented 
part  of  the  country,  where  a  traveller  of  very  ordinary  importance  was  an  object 
of  some  curiosity,  and  might  be  flattered  at  the  little  stir  and  bustle  occasioned  by  his 
presence  in  the  recluse  villages  at  which  he  paused  to  satisfy  his  wants  and  enquiries.  My 
sudden  arrival  at  Cap  Ford,  and  immediate  demand  for  breakfast,  evidently  excited  a  kind 
of  tumult  in  the  place,  and  I  could  venture  to  say  that  there  were  not  two  individuals 
amongst  the  inhabitants  who  were  not  in  some  way  accessary  to  the  great  plot  of  provid- 
ing for  me.  There  were  many  open  and  audible  consultations  en  masse,  besides  an  in- 
calculable number  of  sly  movements  and  private  conferences ;  and  full  two  hours  had 
elapsed  before  I  was  fairly  seated  down  to  my  tea  and  oat-cake.  The  cottage  in  which 
I  was  entertained,  the  whisky-shop  of  the  village,  was  remarkable  for  its  cleanliness,  and 
I  was  treated  by  my  hostess  with  a  refinement  of  courtesy  that  was  exceedingly  pleasing. 
She  sat  herself  down  unsolicited  to  preside  at  the  breakfast-table,  and  could  not  be  pre- 
vailed upon  to  leave  me  by  myself  during  my  meal,  thinking  that  as  the  mistress  of  the 
house  she  owed  this  sort  of  attention  to  a  stranger  and  her  guest.  There  was  nothing  in 
her  behaviour  like  the  overstrained  and  oppressive  civility  that  we  commonly  meet  with 
at  an  inn,  but  a  cordial  politeness  that  had  all  the  grace  of  unpurchased  hospitality.  Her 
good  offices  indeed  were  as  nearly  gratuitous  as  possible,  for  her  demand  upon  me,  after 
all  her  planning,  preparing,  and  serving,  amounted  only  to  sixpence.  I  hope  that  such 
slight  traits  of  manners  will  not  be  considered  as  too  insignificant  for  notice,  and  subject 
me  to  the  reproach  of  frivolous  amplification.  Such  small  attentions,  when  uniformly 
manifested  in  the  conduct  of  a  people,  give  a  great  charm  to  social  life,  and  the  difference 
is  immense  when  they  are  exchanged  for  acts  of  selfishness  and  incivility,  not  more  than 
equal  in  degree  and  as  constantly  expressed.  In  travelling  through  Lancashire  I  noticed 
amongst  the  lower  classes  a  style  of  manners  exactly  the  reverse  of  that  courtesy  with 
which  I  was  so  much  pleased  in  Scotland ;  and  though  the  instances  of  rudeness  that  I 
met  with  are  not  worth  mentioning  individually,  yet  they  were  sufficient  in  their  combina- 
tion to  fix  in  my  mind  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  the  people.  There  are  many  who 

prefer 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  199 

prefer  a  certain  blunt  and  unconceding  temper  as  the  surest  test  of  honesty  and  independence 
of  spirit,  and  that  tendency  to  booing,  which  has  long  been  attributed  to  our  countrymen  of 
Scotland,  has  been  supposed  to  spring  from  a  time-serving  disposition,  more  prone,  for 
selfish  purposes,  to  flattery  than  truth.  But  if  we  consider  the  question  with  candour,  and 
can  forego  a  prescriptive  joke,  I  think  it  will  be  found  that  there  is  not  necessarily  the  most 
honesty  where  there  is  the  least  politeness;  and  that  this  study  to  please  which  dis- 
tinguishes our  neighbours  has  a  nobler  origin,  and  more  generous  views  than  it  has  general 
credit  for,  being  the  natural  result  of  that  system  of  education  peculiar  to  the  country, 
which  softens  the  manners  of  the  people,  while  it  teaches  them  to  respect  the  higher 
duties  of  morality.  If  I  were  to  see  a  person  much  addicted  to  booing  at  the  levee  of  a 
great  man,  I  should  certainly  follow  the  popular  belief  as  to  his  designs ;  but  when  we  find 
a  similar  complaisance  and  easiness  of  nature  in  the  cottages  of  the  poor,  nothing  but 
dulness,  or  malevolence,  or  both,  could  refer  them  to  similar  motives. 

On  putting  my  head  out  of  the  house  again,  I  found  that  the  storm  had  increased,  and 
blew  with  such  violence  that  I  thought  it  scarcely  practicable  to  cross  the  river  with 
safety.  I  begged,  however,  to  consult  with  the  ferry-man.  -"  She's  coming,  Sir,"  replied 
my  hostess,  and  presently  a  woman  made  her  appearance,  who  did  not  spare  me  a  mo- 
ment for  further  hesitation,  but  bounded  into  the  boat,  ordered  me  to  my  seat,  and  pulled 
me  across  the  stream  with  the  greatest  ease,  thoroughly  drenched,  and  quite  in  admiration 
of  her  strength  and  dexterity.  This  bold  and  brawny  female  plies  regularly  and  by  authority 
at  the  ferry,  and  few  men  could  be  found  better  able  to  perform  the  duty  of  her  station, 
in  contempt  of  wind  and  weather.  Men  generally,  and  perhaps  justly,  claim  a  superiority 
over  the  other  sex  in  strength  both  of  body  and  mind,  but  we  occasionally  meet  with  a 
paragon  of  this  sort  to  mortify  our  vanity,  and  take  the  oars  out  of  our  hands. 

It  was  decided  in  full  council  at  Cap  Ford,  that  after  crossing  the  ferry,  my  shortest 
and  easiest  way  would  be  to  proceed  to  the  mouth  of  the  Orr,  and  then  cut  across  the 
sands  of  Belcarry  Bay;  but  I  was  stopped  in  my  progress  by  a  peasant,  who  warned  me 
that  the  flood-tide  was  far  advanced,  and  there  would  be  danger  in  crossing  the  sands.  I 
know  not  whether  he  was  more  to  be  relied  upon  than  my  first  counsellors;  but  as  an  error  on 
his  side  threatened  the  least  mischief,  I  resolved  to  follow  his  advice,  and  made  a  path  for 
myself  over  the  rugged  ridge  of  hills  that  bounds  the  eastern  side  of  the  Orr.  From  the 
summit  I  had  a  good  view  of  the  deep  Bay  of  Belcarry,  girded  by  an  iron-bound  coast, 
and  with  a  tremendous  sea  rolling  into  it.  On  its  eastern  border  stands  Orchardton,  the 
seat  of  Mr.  Douglas,  which,  with  its  woods  and  the  little  embellishments  about  it,  forms  a 
conspicuous  object  amidst  the  rudeness  of  this  stormy  coast.  At  the  western  point  of  the 
bay  is  Belcarry  House,  the  residence  of  Colonel  Urban,  in  a  more  exposed  situation,  but 
sheltered,  like  the  opposite  villa,  by  a  small  plantation.  Saving  these  two  spots,  the 
whole  country  around  was  dismally  bleak  and  barren,  discovering  scarcely  a  mark  of  culti- 
vation, and  indeed  of  so  rugged  a  surface  as  almost  to  defy  the  art  of  man. 

Skirting 


200  A'OYAGE    ROUND   GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Skirting  the  front  of  the  bay,  I  arrived  at  Auchincairn,  a  large  straggling  village,  built 
in  the  very  coarsest  style  of  the  country.  The  cottages  are  constructed  with  stone,  there  being 
plenty  of  this  material  on  the  neighbouring  hills ;  but  they  are  so  shapelessly  put  together, 
that  they  look  as  if  they  were  falling  down  in  a  hundred  directions,  and  are  all  topped  with 
straw  chimnies,  black  and  ragged  from  the  effects  of  time  and  the  weather.  The  people 
here  live  in  a  state  of  poverty  unknown  in  any  part  of  England.  I  had  now  been  travelling 
for  three  days  since  I  left  Dumfries,  and  had  not  been  able  to  procure  a  morsel  of  flesh 
meat,  and  at  Auchincairn  I  could  get  no  butter  to  my  oat-cake.  Potatoes,  oatmeal,  and 
whisky,  compose  the  principal  fare  of  the  people,  and  occasionally  a  salt  herring  is  added 
to  the  dish  to  make  up  a  dinner.  A  bit  of  beef  or  mutton  is  a  delicacy  reserved  only  for 
two  or  three  festive  days  during  the  year.  The  people  have  not  that  appearance  of  full 
and  florid  health  that  I  observed  among  the  well-fed  peasantry  of  Lancashire ;  and  the 
reason  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  that  they  have  too  little  meat  and  too  much  whisky.  They 
drink  whisky  to  a  shocking  excess,  not  having  recourse  to  it  as  a  stimulus  for  extraor- 
dinary occasions,  but  making  it  their  common  and  daily  beverage.  They  sometimes  mix 
it  with  water,  but  more  frequently  take  it  undiluted,  swallowing  it  glass  after  glass  as  one 
drinks  wine.  I  have  seen  a  man,  not  at  all  noted  for  insobriety,  drink  a  pint  of  it  in  this 
manner,  in  the  course  of  an  hour ;  and  for  high  Hays,  a  quart  bottle  of  it  is  not  considered 
by  any  means  an  extravagant  allowance.  The  people  regard  it  as  extremely  wholesome, 
and  therefore  take  it  freely,  and  without  fear,  though,  whatever  were  their  opinion  of  its 
effects,  they  might  excuse  their  devotion  to  it  on  the  ground  of  their  having  nothing  else  to 
drink.  I  say  nothing,  for  water  is  suited  only  to  allay  thirst,  and  to  confine  the  people  to  this 
simple  liquid  would  in  their  estimation  be  dooming  them  never  to  be  merry  again.  Fer- 
mented liquor,  in  some  form  or  other,  must  be  administered  to  the  inhabitants  of  this 
country ;  it  is  a  part  of  our  constitution  no  more  to  be  given  up  than  Magna  Charta — the 
great  national  comforter,  made  by  the  habits  and  prejudices  of  the  people  as  much  a 
necessary  of  life  as  their  bread.  This  being  the  case,  the  matter  is  to  discover  that  which 
is  least  pernicious,  and  he  who  could  cover  all  its  peat-mosses  with  barley  would  be  less  a 
benefactor  to  Scotland  than  he  who  should  introduce  malt-liquor  as  the  common  drink  of 
the  people  instead  of  whisky.  Ale,  it  is  generally  admitted,  is  a  wholesome  and  nourishing 
drink,  and  it  does  not  tempt  men  to  excess  so  potently  as  whisky.  A  kind  of  infatuation 
frequently  takes  possession  of  a  person  who  has  once  devoted  himself  to  spirituous  liquors; 
life  would  be  odious  and  intolerable  to  him  without  them,  and  he  will  sacrifice  every 
other  blessing  of  life  to  obtain  them.  A  dram-drinker  is  easily  made,  and  seldom  to  be 
reformed;  none  are  insensible  to  the  captivation  of  that  hilarity,  and  that  glow  and 
intensity  of  animal  feeling  excited  by  ardent  spirits,  and  few  who  have  once  yielded 
themselves  up  to  them,  whatever  may  be  their  powers  of  mind,  can  forego  the  delight  of 
this  preternatural  elevation,  or  bear  with  patience  the  melancholy  and  the  death-like 
deliquium  that  oppress  them,  when  deprived  of  their  stimulating  cordial.  A  man  who 

makes 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  201 

makes  spirits  his  ordinary  drink,  is  always  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  worst  extreme; 
and  if  he  avoids  it,  he  does  not  escape  unhurt,  for  the  habitual  use  even  of  a  very 
small  quantity  materially  injures  the  strength  and  sensibility  of  the  stomach,  and  renders 
it  dead  to  any  moderate  and  safe  excitement.  There  is  a  difference  in  the  opinions 
of  medical  men  as  to  the  beneficial  effects  of  wine  and  ale,  but  all  agree  that  spirits-  are 
poison. 

A  visible  degree  of  mischief  has  already  arisen  from  the  universal  addiction  of  the 
lower  classes  in  Scotland  to  whisky;  and  it  is  not  too  serious,  I  think,  to  anticipate  from  it 
the  complete  corruption  and  degradation  of  the  people.  Their  moral  character  is  in 
danger,  and  a  certain  injury  accrues  to  their  vigour  of  mind  and  body,  which  is  trans- 
mitted to  their  children,  and  from  them  will  descend  to  another  generation,  still  under 
new  aggravations,  till — really  I  am  afraid  to  finish  tlie  period.  I  have  had  such  frequent 
occasion  to  speak  of  the  existing  virtue  and  moral  refinement  of  the  mass  of  society  in 
this  country,  that  I  am  grieved  to  mention  habits  so  likely  to  pervert  them ;  but  as  we  do 
not  lessen  an  evil  by  looking  at  it  with  only  half  an  eye,  I  have  set  it  forth  in  what  I  con- 
ceive to  be  its  just  magnitude. 

There  being  no  bed  for  a  stranger  at  Auchincairn,  I  was  obliged  to  leave  it  somewhat 
late  in  the  evening,  to  search  for  another  resting  place.  There  is  some  very  grand  scenery 
along  shore,  to  the  westward  of  Belcarry  Bay;  but  the  approach  of  night  and  the  rough- 
ness of  the  weather  induced  rne  to  defer  visiting  it  till  another  day,  and  make  the  best  of 
my  way  for  shelter.  My  road  lay  over  a  most  desolate  country,  generally  covered  with 
heath  and  morass.  Darkness,  together  with  torrents  of  rain,  overtook  me  before  I  was 
housed,  and  it  was  not  without  difficulty  that  I  found  out  the  village  of  Dundrennan, 
where  I  took  up  my  quarters  in  a  wretched  house,  and,  as  usual  of  late,  met  with  nothing 
but  civility,  in  atonement  for  the  want  of  every  kind  of  comfort  and  accommodation. 
J  was  forcibly  struck  here  with  the  decent  manners  and  intelligence  of  the  people,  con- 
trasted with  the  barbarous  rudeness  of  their  habitation,  and  the  whole  style  of  their 
domestic  life.  Here  was  a  place  that  carried  the  imagination  back  to  those  dark  and 
dirty  times  that  preceded  the  invention  of  mops  and  brooms  ;  a  den  of  filth  and  disorder, 
in  which,  had  there  been  any  harmony  and  homogeneousness  in  the  several  parts  of  their 
system  and  condition.,  one  should  have  expected  to  see  people  not  yet  beyond  the  A,  B,  C, 
of  any  kind  of  knowledge,  and  unable  to  count  up  to  ten.  On  the  contrary,  here  was  a 
little  family,  every  individual  of  which  that  could  speak  could  read ;  the  master  of  the 
house,  who  sat  upon  a  chair  with  half  a  bottom  to  it,  and  a  broken  leg,  talked  politics  with 
me,  and  ventured  upon  some  hints  for  setting  up  Europe  straight  and  steady;  and  his  bare- 
footed help-mate,  who  had  obviously  never  touched  the  heads  of  her  children  with  a  comb, 
proved  to  me  in  the  course  of  the  evening  that  there  was  not  a  bairn  o'em  that  could  not 
spell  but.  It  is  really  melancholy  to  see  people  so  cultivated  and  impioved,  sunk  into  a 
state  of  such  absolute  piggishness  in  their  domestic  life;  and  though,  as  a  wet,  weary 

VOL.  ii.  D  D  and 


202  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

and  hungry  traveller,  I  might  have  been  justified  in  feeling  some  little  indignation  at  the  mean- 
ness and  coarseness  of  my  accommodations,  yet  the  people  were  so  obliging  in  their  atten- 
tions, and  so  respectable  from  their  knowledge,  that  I  had  grace  enough  to  feel  more  on 
their  account  than  my  own.  Laziness,  and  a  great  attachment  to  ancient  habits,  stand  in 
the  way  of  their  reform;  and  these  impediments  are  not  likely  soon  to  be  removed  in  a 
sequestered  village,  where  their  prescriptive  tranquillity  is  so  seldom  disturbed  by  the 
intrusion  of  a  stranger.  A  Mrs.  Mason  transplanted  to  every  village  in  Scotland,  with  all 
her  resolution,  patience,  and  good-humour,  might  make  every  village  a  Glenburnie ;  but 
nothing  less  than  her  unremitting  perseverance  could  drive  old  Error  from  his  strong  holds 
and  dusty  corners,  supported  as  he  is  by  those  obstinate  allies — "  I  canna  befastid"  and 
"  It  will  do  weel  eneugh." 

My  supper  at  Dundrennan  consisted  of  barley-broth,  served  up  in  a  brown  earthen- 
ware bason,  with  a  great  horn-spoon  in  it,  the  bowl  of  which  might  have  suited  the 
capacious  mouth  of  a  shark.  This  broth  is  a  national  and  very  popular  dish,  seen  at  the 
tables  of  the  rich  and  poor,  and  must  be  eminently  good,  since  it  obtained  the  good 
word  of  Doctor  Johnson.  To  have  complained  of  insufficiency,  with  such  a  feast  before 
me,  may  appear  unreasonable ;  I  must  therefore  explain,  that  my  broth  was  made  without 
the  usual  and  very  essential  ingredient  of  flesh-meat,  and  formed  but  a  Gallican  kind  of 
supper  for  a  man  who  had  had  no  dinner. 

In  the  morning  I  went  to  see  the  ruins  of  Dundrennan  Abbey,  which  stand  close  to 
the  village,  in  a  narrow  valley,  sheltered  by  high,  bleak,  mossy  hills.  This  was  one  of  the 
largest  and  most  magnificent  fabrics  in  Scotland  ;  but  its  extent  is  now  to  be  traced  only 
in  its  foundations.  The  church  was  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  the  transept  of  which  is  all  that 
is  standing.  The  architecture  is  Gothic,  of  the  same  light  and  elegant  character  as  that  of 
New  Abbey.  It  is  built  with  a  grey  freestone,  of  a  very  beautiful  quality,  which  was 
procured  on  the  coast,  at  a  short  distance  from  Dundrennan.  The  Abbey  was  for  Monks 
of  the  Cistertian  order,  and  was  founded  by  Fergus,  Lord  of  Galloway,  in  the  year  1142. 
The  wretched  Queen  Mary  was  conducted  by  the  Lord  Herries  from  Terreagles  to  Dun- 
drennan, on  her  fatal  way  to  England,  and  spent  at  the  Abbey  the  last  hours  that  she  was 
to  see  in  Scotland.  A  small  burn  passes  the  building,  and  discharges  itself  into  the  sea 
two  miles  further  south,  through  a  creek  in  the  rocks,  called  Port  Mary,  being  the  place 
where  the  Queen  stepped  into  the  boat  that  was  to  bear  her  for  ever  from  her  country. 

After  an  hour  or  two  spent  amongst  the  ruins,  I  proceeded,  under  the  direction  of  an 
intelligent  guide,  to  visit  the  coast  that  I  had  passed  by  unnoticed  on  the  preceding 
evening,  with  a  view  particularly  to  see  the  noted  Cavern  of  Barlocco,  noted  at  least  by  all  the 
world  at  Dundrennan.  Turning  east  from  the  village,  we  ascended  the  hills,  and  came  to  the 
house  of  Orlan,  which  was  in  the  possession,  I  was  told,  of  the  family  of  the  Cutlers  for  six 
hundred  years.  The  last  proprietor  named  Cutler  recently  died,  and  the  house  and  farm 
are  now  held  by  a  distant  relation  of  the  family,  of  a  new  name.  The  land  of  this  farm 

does 


VOYAGE    HOUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  203 

does  not  indicate  that  any  agricultural  skill  was  transmitted  with  their  estate  through  the 
numerous  generations  of  the  Cutlers,  for  at  this  venerable  period  of  its  descent  it  is  yet  in 
the  infancy  of  cultivation.  The  whole  parish  in  which  this  farm  lies  consists  of  lofty 
hills,  covered  with  heath  and  furze,  with  here  and  there  a  good  field  laboured  out  of  the  ^e- 
neral  barrenness.  The  house  of  Orlan  has  been  lately  rebuilt;  but  there  are  a  few  weather- 
beaten  ash  trees  about  it,  of  great  age,  with  their  branches  curiously  warped  and  twisted, 
as  they  have  shrunk  from  the  poison  of  the  western  wind. 

From  hence  we  passed  on  to  Barlocco  House,  standing  on  the  very  summit  of  a  high, 
bare  hill,  a  mark  for  every  storm  that  blows.  It  belongs  to  a  small  farmer,  whom  I  had 
been  forewarned  that  I  should  find  an  obliging  man,  capable  of  assisting  me  materially  in 
my  day's  pursuit.  On  knocking  at  his  door,  we  were  informed  by  his  wife  that  he  was  not 
at  home ;  but  she  would  not  allow  us  to  escape  without  fortifying  us  with  a  drop  of 
whisky,  which  done,  she  sent  us  into  the  corn-field,  where  we  found  our  man  amongst  his 
reapers.  He  proved,  according  to  report,  a  plain,  civil  creature,  proud  of  being  supposed 
able  to  give  any  information  to  a  traveller,  and  still  more  so  of  saying  that  the  greatest 
natural  curiosities  in  the  parish  were  on  his  own  estate.  The  hill  on  which  his  house 
stands  shelves  from  its  summit  with  a  smooth  and  gentle  declivity,  till  it  terminates  in  a 
precipice  over  the  sea,  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  height,  about  which  were  the  objects 
that  I  came  to  see,  and  which  have  gained  a  name  in  this  part  of  the  country  as  being 
among  the  wonders  of  nature.  The  farmer  led  the  way  to  the  spot,  nor  stopped  when,  as 
I  supposed,  he  was  at  the  brink  of  an  inaccessible  precipice,  but  hurried  unconcernedly 
on,  while  I  followed  him  down  a  desperate  descent,  where  a  false  step  had  been  fatal. 
The  cliff  in  this  part,  or  the  hugh,  as  it  is  here  called,  was  overspread  with  grass,  and  just 
not  perpendicular,  obliging  us  to  make  a  slanting  path  down  it,  clinging  with  our  hands  at 
every  step  to  the  grass.  In  this  manner  sidelong  we  worked  our  way,  till  we  came 
to  some  rugged  and  projecting  crags,  which  surmounted,  we  reached  the  bottom,  and 
were  almost  repaid,  I  thought,  for  the  risk  that  we  had  run  by  the  grandeur  of  the  specta- 
cle that  presented  itself  to  us.  We  stood  upon  a  pile  of  loose  and  broken  rocks,  just  out 
of  the  reach  of  the  sea,  which,  as  its  waves  burst  upon  the  shore,  rushed,  foaming,  leap- 
ing, and  whirling  into  every  creek  and  crevice  beneath  our  feet.  On  each  side  of  us,  as 
far  as  we  could  see,  lay  ruinous  heaps  of  rocks,  like  those  on  which  we  stood,  with  the 
same  wild  waters  continually  breaking  and  roaring  amongst  them ;  and,  bounding  this 
scene  of  devastation,  rose  a  terrible  precipice,  worn  into  many  caverns  at  its  base,  and 
shewing  on  its  whole  front  the  most  awful  signs  of  violence  and  destruction. 

The  vast  cave  of  Barlocco  was  immediately  opposite  to  us,  and  I  did  not  think  that  fame 
had  in  any  degree  exaggerated  its  magnificence.  The  entrance  forms  a  pointed  and  very  re- 
gularly proportioned  arch,  by  admeasurement  sixty  feet  high,  and  ninety  feet  broad  at  the 
base.  The  cavern  is  two  hundred  and  forty  feet  deep,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  broad  at 
the  extreme  end,  which  is  its  broadest  part.  A  stupendous  mass  of  rock  overhangs  it,  and 

D  D  2  the 


204  VOYAGE   HOUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

the  wide-spreading  arch,  and  this  immense  superstructure,  have  the  grandest  effect 
imaginable.  The  state  of  the  tide  did  not  allow  us  to  enter  the  cavern;  but  we  had  a 
perfect  view  of  its  whole  extent;  for  from  the  width  of  the  entrance,  and  the  straightness 
of  the  passage,  a  strong  light  reaches  over  every  part  of  it. 

The  rock  at  Barlocco  is  a  pudding-stone,  being  a  mass  of  argillaceous  pebbles  in  a 
cement  of  very  coarse  red  sand-stone.  There  is  but  just  cement  enough  to  hold  the  pebbles 
together,  and  on  the  upper  part  of  the  cliff  it  is  so  soft  that  it  may  be  crumbled  with  the 
fingers;  though  lower  down,  where  exposed  to  the  spray  of  the  sea,  it  is  exceedingly  close 
and  hard.  This  mass  of  pudding-stone  does  not  extend  beyond  the  hill  of  Borlocco,  on 
each  side  of  which  the  coast  is  composed  of  sand-stone,  which  interrupts  a  bed  of 
schistose  rocks  at  Belcarry  Bay,  and  continues  in  a  line  of  lofty  cliffs,  much  broken  and 
indented,  as  far  as  Port  Mary,  to  the  westward  of  which  the  schist  again  makes  its 
appearance,  in  a  bold  promontory,  called  the  Abbey  Head.  The  bulk  of  the  sand-stone 
is  red,  but  it  is  intersected  by  strata  of  white  sand-stone,  and  in  places  intermixed  with 
mill-stone  grit  and  beds  of  shale. 

I  never  made  a  more  perilous  experiment,  in  the  whole  course  of  my  practice  among 
rocks  and  precipices,  than  that  of  clambering  up  from  the  cavern  to  the  summit  of  the 
cliff,  nor  could  the  whole  domain  of  Barlocco,  in  fee-simple,  have  tempted  me  to  repeat  it. 
The  farmer  admitted  the  reasonableness  of  my  feelings,  though  he  was  so  familiar  with 
every  step  of  the  pass  that  he  made  very  light  of  the  danger  to  his  own  person.  The 
remaining  curiosities  on  his  estate,  I  was  glad  to  find,  were  visible  without  any  kind  of 
risk,  for  he  was  resolutely  bent  upon  my  seeing  every  thing  that  he  called  curious.  To 
the  east  of  Barlocco  is  a  small  bay,  bounded  at  one  point  by  a  lofty  headland,  called 
Castel-more  Point,  which  bears  the  marks  of  an  ancient  fortification.  It  projects  into  the 
Bea  in  a  square  form,  with  a  smooth  perpendicular  face  on  three  sides,  and  cut  off  from  the 
land  by  a  deep  trench.  The  portion  thus  separated  contains  a  flat  area,  about  fifty  yards 
square.  The  name  of  the  point  is  Earse,  and  should  prove  that  it  was  fortified  at  a  very 
early  period,  before  the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Scotland  were  driven,  as  their  last  refuge, 
to  the  fastnesses  of  the  Highlands.  There  is  a  headland,  guarded  in  a  similar  manner, 
and  called  by  the  same  name,  at  the  south  point  of  Red  Wharf  Bay,  on  the  coast  of 
Anglesey. 

I  saw  other  sights,  under  the  direction  of  my  worthy  friend  of  Barlocco;  but  if  they 
were  worth  seeing,  they  are  not  worth  talking  about.  I  returned  along  the  edge  of  the 
cliff,  and  observed  nothing  that  particularly  attracted  my  attention  till  I  came  to  Port 
Mary  House,  a  gentleman's  seat,  in  a  most  romantic  situation,  with  some  decorations 
about  it,  which  I  might  not  have  noticed  in  a  less  rugged  country,  but  which  had  a  very 
pleasing  effect  in  my  eyes,  contrasted  with  the  savage  scenes  that  I  had  just  been  ex- 
ploring. The  house  stands  on  a  small  plot  of  level  ground,  closed  in  on  three  sides  by 
hills,  and  opening  in  front  into  a  semicircular  bay,  guarded  by  tremendous  bulwarks  of 

rock 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  205 

rock  at  the  points,  but  between  them  bordered  by  a  low  beach,  over  which  and  through  the 
branches  of  a  wood  that  shelters  it.  the  house  commands  a  fine  view  of  the  ocean. 

Passing  this  bay  I  arrived  at  Port  Mary,  which  I  did  not  visit  without  interest,  from 
its  connexion  with  the  history  of  the  beautiful  and  miserable  queen  whose  name  it  bears. 
A  more  dangerous  and  incommodious  harbour  I  have  never  seen,  though  it  is  occasionally 
frequented  by  vessels  of  forty  or  fifty  tons.  The  creek  is  only  just  wide  enough  for  their 
admission,  and  is  to  be  approached  only  in  the  finest  weather.  It  is  completely  exposed 
to  the  sea,  and  if  a  vessel  were  to  be  surprised  in  it  by  a  sudden  storm  from  the  south, 
nothing  could  save  her  from  destruction.  The  tide  does  not  run  more  than  three  hundred 
yards  up  it,  and  sometimes  rolls  in  with  so  heavy  a  swell,  that  a  vessel  floats  and  strikes 
with  every  wave.  Lime  for  manure,  and  coals  for  the  more  opulent  people  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, who  do  not  burn  turf,  are  the  principal  articles  imported. 

There  was  a  small  sloop  in  the  creek  at  this  time,  about  which  a  little  cluster  of 
people  were  assembled,  condoling  with  the  captain  on  his  being  aground  on  the  first  day 
of  a  neap  tide,  a  mischance  which  would  occasion  him  a  certain  loss  of  time,  and  might 
expose  his  vessel  to  danger,  before  a  spring  tide  should  return  to  liberate  her.  My  arrival 
with  my  guide  brought  an  addition  of  strength,  which  we  cheerfully  employed  in  his 
service;  but,  in  spite  of  all  our  pushing  and  pulling,  the  vessel  proved  immoveable. 

The  various  labours  of  the  day  had  occupied  so  much  time,  that  it  was  evening  before 
I  left  Port  Mary,  and  I  had  to  collect  my  courage  for  another  night  at  Dundrennan.  I 
walked  from  the  creek  along  the  side  of  the  Abbey  burn,  which,  from  Dundrennan  to  the  sea, 
flows  through  a  very  pretty  glen,  thickly  planted  with  ash-trees.  A  fall  of  rain  spoiled 
my  pleasure  during  this  part  of  my  excursion,  and  I  was  glad  to  find  shelter,  such  as  it 
was,  at  the  village,  and  not  unthankfully  again  sat  down  to  my  barley  broth  and  horn  spoon. 
In  the  course  of  the  evening  we  had  an  influx  of  company,  the  captain  of  the  sloop  that  I 
had  left  at  Port  Mary  having  collected  together  a  few  friends,  and  repaired  hither  to 
drown  the  memory  of  neap  tides  in  whisky.  Their  noisy  jollity  did  not  allow  me  or  any 
individual  in  the  house  a  moment  of  repose,  for  they  never  ceased  drinking  and  singing 
till  six  o'clock  in  the  morning.  In  vain  the  landlord  implored  them  to  leave  his  house : 
they  would  hear  of  no  such  thing,  but  mercilessly  called  him  from  his  bed  twenty  times 
during  the  night  for  more  whisky,  till  he  grew  quite  outrageous,  when  they  locked  him  up 
in  their  room,  made  him  as  drunk  as  themselves,  and  then  carried  all  before  them. 
When  I  rose  in  the  morning  I  saw  these  boisterous  revellers  staggering  to  their  homes, 
amidst  the  loud  reproaches  of  their  indignant  wives,  whose  resolute  interference  alone 
had  had  power  to  break  up  their  party. 

Rain  and  a  storm  of  wind  conspired  to  oppose  my  escape  from  hence  after  this  rough 
night ;  but  so  many  worse  annoyances  combined  to  disturb  me  within  doors,  that  I  re- 
solved, at  all  hazards,  to  pursue  my  journey.  I  made  my  way  over  swamp  and  bog  to  the 
sea-side,  west  of  the  Abbey  Head,  where  I  beheld  some  far  grander  scenes  of  rock  than  any  I 

had 


206  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

had  yet  seen  on  the  Scottish  shore.  The  cliffs  are  composed  of  a  schistose  rock,  in  strata 
declining  a  little  generally  from  a  vertical  position  towards  the  sea,  but  in  places  exhibit- 
ing an  extraordinary  confusion  in  their  posture  and  inclinations.  Externally  they  are 
perfectly  black,  and  from  their  colour  and  their  sharp  and  jagged  fractures  have  a  terrible 
aspect.  The  cliffs  are  on  a  vast  scale,  rising  in  places  to  the  height  of  two  hundred  feet 
perpendicularly,  with  a  most  rugged  front,  shewing  tremendous  signs  of  its  exposure  to  a 
stormy  sea.  From  Port  Mary  to  the  mouth  of  the  Dee,  they  are  broken  into  a  series  of 
small  bays,  guarded  by  huge  black  headlands,  each  with  a  low  narrow  ledge  of  rocks 
jutting  out  from  its  extreme  point  far  into  the  sea.  Between  the  headlands  in  every  bay 
the  shore  is  strewed  with  vast  piles  of  broken  rocks,  some  in  enormous  fragments,  and 
presenting  images  of  ruin  that  one  could  scarcely  look  upon  without  terror.  From  a  far 
projecting  point  I  had  a  fine  view  of  the  multiplied  promontories  that  thrust  themselves 
into  the  sea,  seen  in  long  perspective,  dark  precipice  beyond  precipice,  each  with  its 
rugged  outwork,  on  which  the  sea  was  raging  in  perpetual  foam,  while  it  rolled  majes- 
tically in  round  unbroken  billows  into  the  bays.  I  had  seldom  seen  a  more  striking  display 
of  the  untamed  magnificence  of  nature :  here  was  the  ocean  in  all  its  grandeur,  ploughed 
up  by  a  storm,  and  bursting  with  a  continued  and  sullen  roar  against  precipices  of  rock, 
awful  from  their  vastness,  black  and  dreadful,  and  exposing  on  their  battered  sides  a  com- 
bination of  all  rugged  and  horrid  forms.  The  inland  country  accords  in  character  with 
this  rude  scenery  along  shore,  being  little  better  than  a  waste,  patched  with  a  few  culti- 
vated fields,  but  covered  generally  with  black  heath  and  furze. 

On  the  summit  of  Rayberry  Head,  the  loftiest  promontory  on  the  coast,  there  once 
stood  a  castle,  one  of  the  seats  of  the  great  Douglases  ;  but  there  is  not  a  stone  of  it 
remaining,  nor  an  inequality  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  to  mark  its  foundation.  There 
is,  however,  an  interesting  stone,  of  several  tons  weight,  at  the  edge  of  the  precipice,  which 
tradition  declares  was  pitched  up  from  the  shore  by  the  iron-armed  Wallace,  in  a  kind  of 
frolicksome  trial  of  his  strength.  Fifty  men  of  this  puny  age  would  strive  in  vain  to  push 
it  from  its  place.  The  impression  of  the  hero's  fingers  is  said  to  be  clearly  visible  on  the 
stone,  but  it  somehow  escaped  my  observation.  Rayberry  Head  is  exactly  such  a  situa- 
tion as  one  might  have  chosen  in  imagination  for  the  residence  of  the  Douglases;  a  stormy 
steep,  combining  all  that  is  most  wild  and  rude  in  external  nature  to  accord  with  the 
romantic  character  of  those  fiery  and  lawless  chiefs.  It  forms  one  point  of  a  small  bay, 
called  Mullock  Bay,  and  is  guarded  at  its  base  by  a  terrible  barrier  of  outlying  rocks, 
between  which  a  burn  ripples  to  the  sea,  forming  a  narrow  creek,  through  which  a  small 
vessel  may  have  access  to  the  bay  in  fine  weather.  The  Head  is  singularly  broken,  con- 
sisting of  a  vast  central  mass,  from  each  extremity  of  which  a  rocky  point  projects  like  a 
horn  into  the  sea.  The  castle  is  supposed  to  have  stood  on  the  summit  of  the  central 
height,  which  is  the  loftiest,  and  in  such  a  situation  a  very  little  assistance  from  art  might 
have  rendered  it  perfectly  impregnable.  On  the  opposite  side  of  the  bay  is  Netherby 

Point, 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Point,  a  magnificent  promontory  of  great  projection,  and  exposing  on  its  western  side  a 
curious  specimen  of  nature's  masonry,  in  a  long  series  of  strata,  inclining  a  little  towards 
the  sea,  and  resembling  the  nicety  of  man's  art  in  their  uniformity,  and  the  regularity  of 
their  divisions. 

As  I  was  rambling  among  these  rocks  the  sky  became  clearer,  and  the  sun  soon 
bursting  forth  flashed  upon  the  heaving  sea,  and  shewed  every  wave  to  a  far  distance, 
tipped  with  sparkling  foam,  and  here  and  there  a  vessel,  before  concealed,  pitching  and 
labouring  on  her  course.  The  mountains  of  Cumberland  now  appeared  above  the  horizon 
to  the  south-east,  discovered  in  changing  groups  and  forms,  and  at  new  elevations,  as  the 
retiring  clouds  opened  or  closed  amongst  them. 

Rounding  the  Point  of  Bemay  I  entered  upon  the  estuary  of  the  Dee ;  a  wide  inlet, 
always  filled  with  a  great  depth  of  water,  and  furnishing  the  best  harbour  in  the  south  of 
Scotland.  It  is  more  than  two  miles  broad  at  the  entrance,  and  having  a  bold  shore  on 
each  side,  may  be  entered  safely  by  the  largest  vessels  with  any  wind.  At  its  mouth,  on 
the  western  side,  rises  the  Great  Ross,  a  long  and  lofty  ridge  of  rock,  once,  I  imagine,  an 
island,  though  now  connected  with  the  land  by  a  flat,  sandy  isthmus.  Just  off  the  ex- 
treme point  of  this  promontory  lies  the  Little  Ross,  a  small  rocky  island,  of  service  to  the 
haven  as  a  break-water  against  the  western  sea. 

I  proceeded  along  the  eastern  shore,  noticing  no  change  in  the  ruggedness  of  the 
coast,  or  the  cheerless  barrenness  of  the  inland  country,  till,  rounding  a  vast  promontory 
called  Torr  Point,  a  scene  of  an  entirely  altered  character  opened  upon  my  view,  and  one 
of  extraordinary  beauty.  The  fine  expanse  of  the  Dee  before  me  was  forked  by  St. 
Mary's  Isle,  so  entirely  covered  with  wood,  that  it  looked  like  a  grove  rising  from  the 
water :  beyond  it  the  river  was  lost  to  the  sight  amidst  closing  hills,  with  their  summits 
crowned  with  woods,  and  their  sloping  sides  adorned  by  corn-fields  and  meadows — a  fairy 
land  indeed,  compared  with  the  rough  and  naked  wastes  which  still  bordered  the  shore  to 
my  right.  These  sudden  changes  of  scenery  are  very  delightful,  affecting  the  mind  with 
that  kind  of  pleasure  that  one  feels  on  the  unexpected  bursting  forth  of  the  sun  on  a 
gloomy  day.  A  man  who  looks  upon  a  country  only  for  the  gratification  of  his  eye 
should  occasionally  travel  through  tracts  of  barrenness  and  desolation,  that  he  may  enjoy 
with  proper  vivacity  the  charms  of  cultivation,  and  the  cheerfulness  of  every  sign  that 
indicates  the  presence  and  the  art  of  man.  His  perceptions  of  beauty  become  sluggish 
and  cold  in  regions  of  uninterrupted  fertility,  and  require  the  application  of  some  rough 
discipline,  like  that  which  I  had  just  suffered,  to  stimulate  their  exhausted  excitability. 
My  tastes  and  feelings  had  now  been  doing  penance  so  long,  as  the  vulgar  say,  under  the 
washing  tub,  that  I  could  look  with  lively  gratification  on  objects  which,  in  the  listless- 
ness  of  a  pampered  appetite,  I  had  often  turned  from  with  indifference;  and  my  proud 
stomach  had  come  so  completely  down,  that  a  crust  of  wheaten  bread  occurred  to  it  as  a 

luxury. 

After 


208  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

After  advancing  about  a  mile  and  a  half  up  the  Dee,  the  coast  being  less  exposed  to 
the  sea,  became  less  rocky  and  broken ;  and  a  mile  higher  up  the  rocks  disappeared,  and 
gave  way  to  a  sandy  flat,  bordered  at  a  little  distance  from  the  water  by  gentle  hills 
covered  with  young  plantations. 

Passing  a  pretty  bay,  which  penetrates  deep  into  the  land,  detaching  from  it  a  part 
of  St.  Mary's  Isle,  I  came  to  the  base  of  a  high  and  thickly-wooded  hill,  which  bounds 
and  shelters  the  neat  town  of  Kircudbright,  where  I  stopped,  nothing  loth,  and  to  be  con- 
soled, after  all  my  toiling  and  fasting,  by  the  comforts  of  a  clean  and  plentiful  inn. 

I  found  the  town  in  a  state  of  amazing  bustle  and  agitation,  with  music  play- 
ing, colours  flying,  and  nearly  all  the  men  of  the  place  pacing  in  procession  through 
the  principal  street.  This  was  the  day  for  electing  the  Deacons  of  trades,  and  the 
people  were  now  marching  with  due  pomp  and  solemnity  to  the  town-hall,  where, 
after  the  grand  business  of  election  was  over,  the  night  was  to  conclude  with  dancing, 
•whisky,  and  tobacco.  These  deacons  are  very  useful  personages,  and  tend  greatly,  with- 
out the  blustering  and  tyranny  that  are  sometimes  manifested  by  officers  of  more  power, 
to  preserve  the  harmony  and  good  order  which  distinguish  the  towns  of  Scotland.  If  a 
taylor  or  shoe-maker,  for  instance,  should  intrude  into  a  town,  without  a  proper  licence 
and  qualification,  or  if  any  other  sin  should  be  committed  against  the  common  interests 
of  either  trade,  up  starts  Mr.  Deacon,  who,  meeting  the  offender  at  the  moment  of  his 
crime,  forces  him  to  immediate  atonement,  and  by  this  quick  justice,  frequently  prevents 
the  necessity  of  a  protracted  and  troublesome  litigation.  Nor  does  he  superintend  only 
the  general  concerns  of  his  peculiar  profession,  but  interferes,  by  common  consent,  with  a 
very  beneficial  authority  in  many  little  matters  of  domestic  economy,  among  his  fraternity. 
If  the  members  of  a  certain  trade  wish  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  meal  or  potatoes,  as  well  as 
of  materials  for  their  business,  the  deacon  is  charged  with  the  duty  of  procuring  the 
supply,  and  bargaining  for  the  price,  and  he  usually  gives  a  bill  at  three  months  in  pay- 
ment; a  great  accommodation  to  the  purchasers,  who  may  not  always  have  money  in 
their  possession  at  the  times  when  they  can  take  in  stock  to  the  greatest  advantage. 
The  bill  is  never  objected  to,  as  every  individual  of  the  trade,  on  the  account  of  which  it 
is  passed,  is  liable  to  discharge  it.  The  deacons  are  chosen  annually,  and  as  the  office 
is  open  to  every  one  of  fair  character,  it  operates  as  an  incitement  to  general  good 
conduct. 

Kircudbright  is  a  very  small  town,  consisting  principally  of  two  short  streets,  neat, 
clean,  and  quiet,  without  manufactures,  and  with  very  limited  commercial  relations 
beyond  its  own  immediate  vicinity.  It  contains  nothing  that  can  claim  the  notice  of  a 
traveller,  except  an  old  castle,  and  that  is  interesting  only  from  its  antiquity,  being 
nothing  more  than  a  plain  strong  house,  called  a  castle,  and  constructed  at  least  with  the 
solidity  of  one,  as  was  formerly  the  house  of  every  private  gentleman  of  any  note  in  the 
country,  whose  wealth  and  rank  were  temptations  to  rapacity  and  violence  in  times  of 

general 


Kirkcudbright 


The  Mull  of  Galloway,  Wigtonshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  209 

general  turbulence.  It  is  built  of  coarse  unhewn  stones,  and  from  its  gloominess,  want  of 
windows,  and  every  kind  of  ornament,  might  be  mistaken  for  a  gaol.  It  has  no  outworks, 
and  only  one  small  ill-guarded  entrance,  which  if  an  enemy  had  made  himself  master  of, 
he  had  no  other  impediment  to  arrest  his  progress,  for  it  opens  directly  upon  a  flight  of 
steps  leading  to  the  chambers.  On  a  slab  of  freestone  over  the  doorway  are  quartered 
the  arms,  six  hedgehogs,  beneath  which  are  the  date  1582  and  the  following  inscription : 

Dons — Dedit : 

The  Hows  of  Herries. 

We  do  not  always  see  the  greatest  commercial  spirit  and  activity  in  places  which 
hold  out  the  most  striking  natural  advantages  to  trade.  Kircudbright  has  or  might  have 
the  benefit  of  an  excellent  harbour,  with  water  sufficient  for  ships  of  fire  hundred  tons, 
but  there  is  only  one  vessel  of  more  than  fifty  tons  belonging  to  the  port,  and  no  quay  or 
any  kind  of  convenience  for  loading  and  unloading  vessels.  The  place  seems  to  be  in 
much  the  same  state  as  described  in  the  travels  of  De  Foe.  "  I  saw  nothing,"  he  observes, 
"  but  a  harbour  without  ships,  a  port  without  trade,  and  a  fishery  without  nets.  This  is 
owing,"  he  adds,  "  partly  to  the  poverty  and  partly  to  the  disposition  of  the  inhabitants, 
who  are  indeed  a  sober,  grave,  religious  sort  of  people,  but  have  no  notion  of  acquiring 
wealth  by  trade ;  for  they  strictly  obey  the  Scriptures  in  the  very  letter  of  the  text,  by 
'  being  content  with  such  things  as  they  have.'"  I  did  not  become  sufficiently  acquainted 
with  the  inhabitants  of  this  peaceful  town  to  declare  whether  their  want  of  enterprise  can 
still  be  referred  in  any  degree  to  such  a  principle  of  pious  and  philosophical  forbearance, 
but  certainly  to  be  content  with  such  things  as  they  have  is  not  generally  a  characteristic 
mark  of  the  people  of  Scotland.  I  think,  however,  that  it  will  be  doing  them  no  more 
than  justice  to  say,  that  they  are  content  with  such  things  as  they  can  get. 

There  are  forty  vessels  belonging  to  Kircudbright,  from  thirty  to  fifty  tons  burthen, 
and  one  of  a  hundred  and  eighty  which  brings  timber  from  North  America.  The  other 
imports  are  merely  a  few  articles  of  general  consumption  for  the  use  of  the  town  and 
neighbourhood.  Potatoes  and  a  small  quantity  of  grain  are  exported  to  Liverpool  and 
the  Highlands.  On  applying  at  the  custom-house  for  this  momentous  sum  of  information, 
I  could  not  help  smiling  at  the  mysterious  solemnity  with  which  I  was  received,  and  the 
doubts  which  it  was  thought  necessary  to  entertain  of  my  patriotism,  when  I  requested  to 
look  into  the  secrets  of  the  books.  Though  I  endured  a  long  trial  of  cross-questioning, 
and  asserted  again  and  again  the  spotlessness  of  my  loyalty,  I  could  perceive  that  I  was 
still  very  mistrustfully  regarded  by  my  wary  auditor,  and  he  dismissed  me,  after  all,  on  my 
first  visit,  with  no  other  concession  than  that  I  was  not  absolutely  to  despair.  When  I 
called  again,  I  found  him  still  cold  and  deliberate  in  his  manner,  and  he  handed  to  me  a 
bit  of  paper  containing  the  information  that  I  required,  with  a  look  which  intimated  that 
he  had  made  too  hasty  a  sacrifice  of  his  caution  to  my  importunity.  I  assured  him  most 

vor.  TI.  E  E  absolutely, 


210  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

absolutely,  on  casting  my  eye  over  the  paper,  that  I  would  not  betray  his  confidence; 
and  he  replied,  but  still  not  cordially  or  in  a  tone  of  faith,  "  I  hope  not,  Sir."  His  doubts 
may  have  been  assumed  to  magnify  the  favour  that  he  accorded  me,  and  raise  my  notions 
of  his  importance,  but  I  rather  believe  that  he  felt  all  the  distrust  which  he  expressed, 
and  saw  me  depart  master  of  his  last  quarter's  accounts,  with  a  dire  foreboding  of  mis- 
chief in  his  heart.  At  this  moment  of  universal  peace  one  should  rarely  meet,  perhaps, 
with  an  instance  of  such  extravagant  alarm  in  a  custom-house  officer ;  but  when  I  was 
here,  Buonaparte  had  still  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  such  was  the  fear  of  his  power,  and 
his  hocus-pocus  kind  of  stratagems,  that  a  man  in  a  situation  of  some  trust  might  not 
think  it  safe  to  disclose  to  the  conjuror  that  meal  and  potatoes  were  sent  from  Kircud- 
bright  to  the  Highlands. 

The  country  about  Kircudbright  is  very  agreeably  diversified  by  hills,  and  valleys, 
and  woods,  and  the  walks  on  St.  Mary's  Isle,  on  which  stands  the  house  of  Lord  Selkirk, 
are  amongst  the  most  beautiful  to  be  seen  in  the  country,  being  laid  out  with  great  taste 
between  narrow  openings  in  a  thick  grove,  through  which  the  eye  catches  glimpses  of  the 
river,  the  rocky  cliffs  that  guard  its  entrance,  and  the  distant  sea.  The  house  is  small, 
and  remarkable  only  for  its  unostentatious  plainness  and  simplicity.  St.  Mary's  Isle  had, 
at  an  early  period,  an  establishment  for  religious  recluses  upon  it,  but  there  are  now  no 
remains  of  any  ancient  buildings  to  be  seen.  Though  still  bearing  the  name  of  an  island, 
it  is  now  only  a  peninsula,  being  connected  with  the  east  bank  of  the  Dee  by  a  flat,  so 
cultivated  and  adorned,  that  there  is  no  mark  but  its  flatness  to  indicate  that  it  was  once 
covered  by  water.  The  names  of  many  places  in  this  neighbourhood  signify  that  they 
were  once  consecrated  to  the  use  of  religious  bodies ;  but  the  reformation  seems  to  have 
expended  its  violence  here  without  mercy,  and  spared  not  a  monument  to  its  enemies. 
On  the  west  bank  of  the  river  is  a  spot  called  Nun's  Mill,  and  about  two  miles  below  St. 
Mary's  Isle  is  Monksman's  Lake,  an  excellent  roadstead,  of  great  importance  as  a  place 
of  general  shelter  for  all  classes  of  vessels  in  the  winter  time. 

Having  enjoyed  a  reasonable  allowance  of  rest  and  refreshment  at  Kircudbright,  and 
undergone  a  complete  refit,  I  crossed  the  ferry  and  continued  my  journey.  Ferry-boats 
and  fares  are  in  general  so  justly  the  objects  of  a  traveller's  indignation  and  reproaches, 
that  I  must  mention  with  due  praise  the  admirable  appointment  of  the  boat  at  this 
place,  and  the  extreme  moderation  of  the  fare.  The  boat  runs  along  a  rope  stretched 
across  the  river,  and  is  pushed  along  by  a  single  person,  whatever  may  be  the  load, 
with  great  ease  and  expedition.  The  charge  for  a  man  is  a  half-penny,  and  for  a  horse 
a  penny.  The  rope  is  a  simple  and  excellent  contrivance,  which  prevents  the  boat  from 
being  borne  away  by  the  tide,  and  conducts  it  with  certainty  to  the  proper  landing- 
place. 

From  the  western  bank  of  the  river,  the  town  and  its  old  gloomy  castle,  with  the 
water  in  front,  and  a  high  wooded  hill  rising  abruptly  beliind  them,  have  a  very  pic- 
turesque 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  211 

turesque  effect.  I  proceeded  towards  the  mouth  of  the  river,  along  the  base  of  a  steep 
bank,  shaded  with  ash,  birch,  and  fir  trees,  till  I  approached  the  sea,  when  the  wood  dis- 
appeared, and  a  naked  weather-beaten  coast  opposed  its  rocks  to  the  expanding  estuary. 
A  sandy  bay  runs  far  into  the  land  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Great  Ross,  beyond 
which  I  found  no  road,  and  was  obliged  to  give  up  my  horse  to  a  lad  who  attended  me, 
with  an  injunction  to  make  his  way  to  the  mouth  of  the  river  Fleet  and  wait  for  me  there, 
while  I  pursued  my  usual  rugged  course  along  the  sea-side.  On  rounding  the  Great 
Ross,  a  coast  of  the  same  grand  and  savage  character  lay  before  me  as  that  to  the  east- 
ward of  the  Dee,  composed  of  the  same  kind  of  rock,  and  exposing  a  front  equally 
broken  and  ruinous.  The  inland  country  reassumed  all  its  dreariness,  consisting  of  lofty 
naked  hills,  left  in  open  wastes,  or  divided  into  enclosures  by  stone  walls.  The  hills 
run  north  and  south,  terminating  in  the  sea  in  a  series  of  bold  promontories,  between 
which  are  small  bays,  deeply  indented  into  the  land,  and  all  bounded  between  the  points 
by  low  rugged  reefs  of  shattered  rock. 

At  low  water  these  reefs  appear  running  out  more  than  half  a  mile  from  the  shore, 
and  discover  an  extraordinary  scene  of  waste  and  destruction  among  the  rocks,  terrible 
from  the  ideas  iyhich  it  raises  in  the  mind  of  the  power  of  the  mighty  element,  which  has 
spread  this  solid  matter  in  ruins  before  it.  There  is  a  regularity  and  an  appearance  of 
contrivance  in  the  structure  of  these  rocks,  which,  as  the  work  of  nature,  affect  the  be- 
holder with  a  pleasing  kind  of  wonder,  and  give  a  superadded  interest  to  the  awful 
grandeur  of  their  disjoined  and  broken  strata.  A  variety  of  singular  forms  may  be  seen 
among  the  ruins  along  the  shore ;  in  places  whole  masses  of  strata  have  been  broken 
down  to  a  level  with  the  sea,  saving  here  and  there  a  single  stratum,  notched  along  the 
summit  like  a  rude  battlemented  wall,  or  a  few  slabs  which  stand  up  like  grave-stones  in  a 
church-yard.  The  promontories  are  very  magnificent,  rising  on  all  sides  in  tremendous 
precipices,  split  into  huge  wedges  by  deep  fissures  and  chasms,  and  surrounded  at  their 
base  by  outlying  rocks,  shewing  their  black  splintered  tops  above  the  foaming  and  eddying 
sea. 

From  the  summit  of  Borness,  the  first  great  promontory  to  the  westward  of  the  Dee, 
I  caught  a  view  of  Wigton  Bay,  running  many  miles  into  the  country,  with  a  group  of 
mountains  rising  beyond  its  furthest  point  of  recess,  amongst  which  was  the  majestic 
Cairnsmuir,  the  loftiest  mountain  in  the  south  of  Scotland.  The  whole  western  coast  of 
the  bay  was  visible  down  to  the  Burrow  Head,  which  in  this  part  of  the  country  divides 
with  the  Mull  of  Galloway  the  reputation  of  being  the  most  southern  point  of  Scotland. 
It  is  impossible  to  decide  the  question  of  projection  by  the  eye,  and,  therefore,  though 
the  preference  is  given  to  the  Mull  of  Galloway,  in  our  maps  and  charts,  those  who 
contend  for  at  least  an  equal  claim  on  the  part  of  its  rival  cape  will  not  give  up  their 
point. 

Descending  from  Borness,  I  crossed  a  flat  penetrated  by  several  deep  creeks,  har- 

E  E  2  bours 


212  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

hours  for  smugglers.  Before  me  was  the  promontory  of  Moncraig,  opposing  a  long  front 
to  the  sea,  and  rising  in  places  to  the  height  of  two  hundred  feet  perpendicularly.  I 
ascended  it  in  the  expectation  of  seeing  some  remains  of  ancient  fortifications,  but  I 
cannot  give  my  testimony  in  favour  of  their  existence,  though  I  searched  for  them  with 
sufficient  earnestness  and  perseverance.  West  of  the  promontory  I  entered  upon  another 
level  tract,  and  proceeded  along  a  singular  shore,  split  into  numerous  creeks,  with  a 
succession  of  low  ledges  of  rock  projecting  into  the  sea  like  the  teeth  of  a  comb.  At 
the  head  of  one  of  these  creeks,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Fleet,  is  the  village  of  Kirk- 
Andrew,  a  place  of  considerable  antiquity,  which,  if  it  was  ever  otherwise  than  as  it  is, 
must  have  been  in  a  better  condition,  for  it  is  now  at  the  ne  phis  ultra  of  lowliness  and 
obscurity.  It  was  not  always  so,  as  I  was  informed  by  an  old  man  of  the  place,  though 
likely  to  continue  so,  he  observed,  unless  it  should  please  God  to  send  times  very  different 
from  the  present,  that  is,  as  he  meant,  unless  it  should  please  God  to  exterminate  ex- 
cisemen, or  at  least  keep  them  away  from  Kirk-Andrew.  This  was  the  spot  where  St. 
Andrew  is  said  to  have  landed  after  his  passage  from  Ireland,  and  a  church  was  erected 
here  and  dedicated  to  that  illustrious  personage,  but  the  ground  thus  sanctified  was 
profaned  in  aftertimes  by  hordes  of  smugglers,  who  carried  on  their  business  here  with 
great  spirit  and  success,  till  their  audacity  exposed  them  to  the  observation  of  the  custom- 
house officers  of  the  country,  who  pounced  upon  them,  seized  their  boats,  broke  up  their 
magazines,  and  discovered  and  sacked  their  hiding-places,  destroying  at  one  fell  swoop 
the  whole  equipment  of  their  trade.  No  other  sources  of  profit  have  yet  been  discovered 
to  atone  for  the  ravages  of  this  disastrous  day,  and  the  poor  inhabitants  of  the  village 
pick  up  a  subsistence  the  Lord  knows  how.  On  enquiring  whether  some  relief  might 
not  be  derived  from  fishing,  I  was  told  that  the  funds  of  the  Avhole  village  would  be  in- 
sufficient to  provide  a  single  boat ;  and  if  there  were  twenty  boats,  few  would  be  found 
willing  to  use  them  for  the  sake  of  earning  less  in  a  month  than  their  former  business 
might  yield  them  in  a  day.  Smugglers,  like  gamblers,  become  unfitted  for  every  occu- 
pation requiring  patient  and  steady  industry ;  accustomed  to  sudden  gains,  they  prefer 
them,  with  a  life  of  risk  and  anxiety,  to  the  slow  rewards  of  a  secure  and  toilsome 
pursuit. 

I  was  pretty  well  tired,  more  by  the  roughness  than  the  length  of  my  walk,  when  I 
arrived  at  this  place,  and  looked  out  with  some  impatience  for  my  horse,  but  could  see 
nothing  of  him,  and  had  the  mortification  to  hear  that  I  must  give  up  all  expectation  of 
meeting  him  at  the  appointed  place,  there  being  no  road  to  it  for  a  horse.  And  yet  the 
plan  of  my  movements  had  been  very  deliberately  considered  by  my  host  at  Kircud- 
bright,  and  he  had  decided  upon  the  existence  of  the  road,  which  I  found  wanting,  as 
positively  as  if  he  had  travelled  over  it  a  hundred  times.  1  proceeded,  as  my  best  course 
in  this  difficulty,  to  the  road  which  lay  nearest  to  the  mouth  of  the  Fleet,  but  found  no 
horse ;  waited  there  for  an  hour — but  still  no  horse ;  toiled  on  for  seven  long  miles — but 

still 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  213 

still  no  horse ;  and  arrived  at  Gatehouse,  where  I  had  still  to  keep  wondering  what  could 
have  become  of  my  horse.  The  boy  to  whose  care  I  had  confided  him  had  a  part  of  my 
materiel  in  his  possession,  which  I  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  losing,  and  I  had  im- 
mediately, as  I  imagined,  to  hasten  after  him  to  Kircudbright ;  but  at  this  critical 
moment  of  my  embarrassment,  the  sound  of  distant  hoofs  was  heard  in  the  village,  and 
presently  a  jaded,  limping  horse  made  his  appearance,  his  nose  drooping  to  the  ground, 
and  his  bent  legs  sprawling  about  with  the  clatter  of  a  whole  troop,  as  he  stumbled  along 
at  an  undefined  pace  between  a  walk  and  a  trot.  He  had  evidently  been  fighting  his  way 
through  no  common  difficulties,  for  he  was  not  only  lean  and  weary,  but  plaistered  over, 
head  and  back  and  all,  with  cakes  of  mud.  I  had  started  from  Kircudbright  on  a  rough 
looking  beast,  it  is  true,  but  I  could  recognize  no  trace  of  him  in  this  deplorable  animal, 
and  when  he  stopped  at  the  door  of  the  inn,  amidst  the  undisguised  merriment  of  a  cluster 
of  travellers,  waiters,  and  chamber-maids,  I  certainly  felt  very  much  disposed  to  deny 
that  I  had  any  concern  in  him.  The  boy  I  found,  true  to  his  trust  and  my  service,  had 
contrived  to  get  to  the  mouth  of  the  Fleet,  where  he  waited  for  me  till  he  conceived  there 
was  no  chance  of  seeing  me,  and  then  determined  to  push  on  to  Gatehouse.  He  could 
discover  no  road,  and  made  his  way  over  hedges,  ditches,  and  gates,  till  his  poor  beastie, 
he  observed,  who  had  regularly  fallen  upon  his  knees,  or  tumbled  over  and  over,  at  every 
leap  that  he  attempted,  had  scarcely  a  leg  to  stand  upon.  Both  horse  and  rider,  however, 
had  fortunately  escaped  with  whole  bones,  and  I  saw  them  depart  on  the  following  morn- 
ing with  a  fair  prospect  of  seeing  home  again. 

On  coming  within  sight  of  the  Fleet,  I  was  surprised  by  a  sudden  change  of  scenery; 
a  transition  from  a  rude  waste  to  the  grace  and  gaiety  of  a  well  cultivated  and  peopled 
country,  more  striking  even  than  that  which  I  noted  with  admiration  on  the  Dee.  I  have 
not  often  seen  a  more  beautiful  and  diversified  landscape,  one  combining  a  greater  variety 
of  character  within  the  compass  of  a  single  and  distinct  view,  than  that  presented  on  the 
banks  of  the  Fleet,  from  Gatehouse  to  the  sea.  About  a  mile  below  the  village,  the  river 
expands  into  a  broad  estuary,  bordered  on  each  side  by  gentle  banks,  and  broken  near  its 
junction  with  the  open  sea  by  clusters  of  islands  and  rocks.  On  the  eastern  side  is  Caly, 
the  seat  of  Mr.  Murray,  of  Broughton,  said  to  be  the  largest  and  most  splendid  mansion 
in  Galloway.  It  stands  in  a  beautiful  park,  which  occupies  nearly  the  whole  length  of 
the  estuary,  descending  from  a  considerable  height  with  an  easy  slope  to  the  water,  spread 
with  a  bright  verdure,  and  decorated  with  wood,  in  single  trees,  and  all  ornamental  com- 
binations. The  house  is  of  a  light  yellow  colour,  and  standing  high  on  the  bank,  with  an 
open  lawn  before  it,  forms  a  conspicuous  object,  which  forces  itself  at  once,  and  in  all  its 
dignity,  upon  the  eye. 

The  scenery  on  the  opposite  coast  is  less  elegant,  but  more  varied  and  picturesque. 
The  vast  hill  of  Cairnharrow,  dark  and  precipitous,  rises  immediately  behind  the  fertile 
banks  that  bound  the  shore  at  the  entrance  of  the  estuary,  and  from  thence  a  range  of 

gentler 


214  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

gentler  hills  continues  to  the  northward,  rising  in  easy  slopes  from  the  water,  clothed  with 
a  profusion  of  wood.  Several  gentlemen's  seats  decorate  the  borders,  and  at  the  head  of 
the  estuary  stands  the  ancient  castle  of  Cardoness,  perched  on  the  summit  of  an  elevated 
mount  at  the  edge  of  a  beautiful  bay,  girded  all  round  by  a  close  dark  wood.  North  of 
this  bay  the  river  contracts  into  a  small  stream,  and  flows  through  a  pretty  valley,  in 
which  appears  the  village  of  Gatehouse  amidst  meadows  and  woods,  enclosed  by  high 
green  hills,  beyond  which,  to  the  northward,  are  seen  the  rough  and  naked  summits  of 
mountains. 

Gatehouse  is  a  large  village,  remarkable  for  the  neatness  and  regularity  of  its  streets 
and  houses.  It  was  built  not  many  years  ago  on  the  estate  and  under  the  direction  of 
the  late  Mr.  Murray,  and  having  been  extended  within  a  short  period  to  its  present  size, 
is  not  deformed  by  any  of  those  irregularities  which  necessarily  break  in  upon  places  of 
slower  growth,  but  shews  in  its  whole  arrangement  the  uniformity  and  consistency  of  a 
simple  design.  The  main  street  is  spacious  and  well  paved,  and  the  houses  on  each  side 
of  it  are  of  good  size  and  very  compact,  mostly  white-washed,  and  roofed  with  slates. 
At  one  extremity  this  street  is  connected  with  a  handsome  bridge,  which,  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  river,  leads  into  another  street  equally  neat  and  clean.  Two  rows  of  cottages 
running  parallel  with  the  main  street,  and  divided  from  it  and  each  other  by  gardens, 
complete  the  village,  which  I  have  pleasure  in  describing  thus  minutely,  from  its  agree- 
able contrast  to  such  combinations  of  raggedness,  dirt,  and  disorder  as  Powhellin  and 
Auchincairn. 

Gatehouse  was  not  begun  with  any  ambitious  expectations,  but  soon  after  its  founda- 
tion some  enterprizing  manufacturers,  who  had  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  at  a 
settlement  in  Kircudbright,  obtained  a  piece  of  ground  here  from  Mr.  Murray,  with  per- 
mission to  build  a  cotton-factory  upon  it,  and  this  establishment  raising  a  great  demand 
for  people,  the  village  speedily  swelled  out  into  an  unexpected  size  and  importance.  On 
the  first  introduction  of  the  business,  the  people  were  found  very  ill  disposed  to  submit  to 
the  long  confinement  and  regular  industry  that  it  required  from  them;  but  high  wages 
soon  reconciled  them  to  these  mortifications,  and  it  was  not  long  before  an  extraordinary 
zeal  manifested  itself  in  this  part  of  the  country  for  this  new  and  profitable  employment. 
The  first  manufactory  at  Gatehouse  meeting  with  success,  several  others  were  raised,  and 
the  village  designed  for  a  few  country  people  and  shop-keepers  contained,  in  a  very  few 
years,  fifteen  hundred  inhabitants.  Its  prosperity  stimulated  the  activity  of  other  ad- 
venturers, and  several  rival  villages,  which  I  shall  hereafter  have  to  mention,  supported  by 
similar  means,  started  up  with  equal  rapidity  in  the  neighbouring  country. 

I  should  be  happy  if  nothing  were  required  to  be  added  to  this  short  account  of 
these  new  raised  communities,  and  I  could  leave  them  to  the  fancy  of  my  reader  still 
pushing  on  earnestly  and  prosperously  in  the  way  of  industry.  But  unfortunately  their 
present  condition  will  not  justify  any  such  flattering  representations.  The  short  prosperity 

that 


Port  Patrick,  Wigtonshire 


Cardness  Castle,  near  Gatehouse,  Kirkcudbrightshire 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GKEAT    BRITAIN.  215 

that  attended  the  manufactures  has  yielded  to  the  pressure  of  these  calamitous  times,  and 
the  factories  in  this  part  of  the  country,  so  lately  founded,  are  now  stripped  and  deserted. 
The  manufacturing  of  cotton  on  a  small  scale,  and  with  such  machinery  as  the  poor 
people  could  procure  and  set  up  in  their  own  houses,  is  still  the  chief  business  of  Gate- 
house, but  the  great  establishments  which  collected  the  inhabitants  together  being  closed, 
many  are  necessarily  left  with  very  slight  means  of  support,  and  general  poverty  and 
gloom  have  succeeded  to  days  of  cheerfulness  and  competency.  As  the  village  lies  on 
the  public  road  to  Port  Patrick,  it  derives  a  certain  aid  from  the  influx  of  travellers,  which 
supports  a  good  inn,  and  a  few  shops,  but  contributes  little  benefit  to  the  mass  of  the 
people. 

After  all  there  are  many,  and  I  feel  disposed  to  agree  with  them,  who  will  see  reason 
for  rejoicing  rather  than  repining  that  the  manufacturing  system  has  not  obtained  a  more 
complete  ascendancy  in  this  part  of  the  country,  as  it  inevitably  would  have  tended  to 
corrupt  the  morals  of  the  people,  and  have  laid  the  foundations  of  more  extended  and 
permanent  evil  than  results  from  its  failure.  During  the  short  trial  that  was  made  of  it 
in  this  village,  a  manifest  change  took  place  in  the  character  and  deportment  of  the  in- 
habitants, who,  from  a  grave,  quiet,  and  orderly  race,  were  becoming  loose  and  dissipated, 
and  sinking  fast  into  reckless  profligacy  and  licentiousness.  Gaining  more  money  than 
was  necessary  to  their  support,  they  spent  the  overplus  in  an  additional  allowance  of 
whisky,  and  all  became  eager  for  money  with  a  view  solely  to  this  dangerous  indulgence. 
"While  manufactures  flourished  and  the  people  were  in  full  pay,  there  were  consumed  in 
this  small  place  one  hundred  and  fifty  gallons  of  whisky  weekly,  for  six  successive 
months.  There  can  be  no  question  that  where  money  gives  men  no  other  benefit  than 
an  unlimited  power  over  whisky,  the  nearer  they  are  to  a  state  which  confines  them  to 
bread  and  water  the  better.  I  am  not  contending  that  our  national  happiness  and  pro- 
sperity would  be  advanced  by  the  general  abolition  of  our  manufactures,  but  it  is  certain 
that  whatever  good  they  yield  us  is  not  purchased  without  a  great  sum  of  evil,  which  one 
would  not  wish  to  see  visited  upon  a  division  of  our  people  peculiarly  distinguished  for 
the  purity  of  their  morals. 

I  found  a  very  jolly  and  turbulent  party  assembled  at  the  inn  in  Gatehouse,  composed  of 
riders  or  bag-men,  as  they  are  called,  an  order  of  itinerant  traders,  with  whom  I  had  been 
associated  in  the  course  of  my  travels,  far  more  frequently  than  was  agreeable  to  me,  but 
Avhom  I  found  particularly  troublesome  in  Scotland,  where  they  abounded  so  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  keep  out  of  their  way.  Every  body,  I  imagine,  must  be  familiar  with  the  sort  of 
personages  I  allude  to;  a  set  of  men  in  drab  great-coats,  who  are  seen  jogging  along  the  road 
on  very  decent  horses,  with  their  skirts  projecting  forth  on  each  side  as  if  they  sat  upon  a 
sack  of  meal.  They  have  a  room  set  apart  for  them  in  every  inn,  called  the  travellers  room, 
and  into  this  common  receptacle,  hung  round  with  coats  and  whips,  filled  in  every  corner 
with  bags  and  bundles,  and  reeking  with  the  steam  of  punch,  I  had  of  lute  been  regularly 

introduced, 


2lC  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    13BITAI1C. 

introduced,  with  an  assurance  always  that  there  was  no  private  apartment  disengaged. 
It  was  disagreeable  to  be  forced,  whether  one  would  or  no,  into  a  company  of  strangers, 
but  when  I  was  not  too  tired  to  be  pleased,  I  sometimes  found  them  not  unentertaining 
companions.  They  were  travellers  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  I  was  willing  to 
listen  to  the  peculiar  anecdotes  and  points  of  information  and  personal  adventures,  which 
all  were  eager  to  communicate,  in  spite  of  their  professional  slang  and  vulgarity,  if  indeed 
these  were  not  the  most  amusing  properties  about  them.  They  are  men  of  high  pre- 
tension, have  a  bustling,  swaggering  importance  in  their  manner,  affect  a  nice  judgment 
in  their  drink,  and  talk  more  of  their  horses  than  their  bags.  From  their  numbers  and  the 
constancy  of  their  custom,  they  are  treated  with  great  respect  at  all  the  inns  which  they 
frequent,  and  a  man  who  values  a  bottle  from  the  best  bin  in  the  cellar  more  than  privacy, 
will  find  his  account  in  joining  the  mess  in  the  travellers  room. 

On  leaving  Gatehouse  I  proceeded  to  visit  a  hill  which  bears  the  traces  of  one  of 
those  singular  structures  called  vitrified  forts.  The  hill  lies  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
below  the  village  on  the  western  side  of  the  Fleet,  and  is  remarkable  for  a  brighter  verdure 
than  any  of  the  adjoining  hills,  a  distinction  which  it  is  said  to  preserve  invariably  through- 
out the  year.  It  inclines  to  a  conical  figure,  but  has  a  flat  area  on  the  summit,  round  the 
edge  of  which  is  seen  in  places  a  low  ridge  of  earth,  covering  the  remains  of  a  wall.  Some 
small  holes  have  been  made  in  different  parts  of  the  ridge,  in  which  heaps  of  stones  are 
discovered,  some  in  a  state  of  complete  vitrification,  and  all  shewing  very  evident  marks 
of  having  been  acted  upon  by  fire.  Some  of  them  adhere  together,  but  whether  the  whole 
wall  was  compacted  into  one  mass  cannot  be  decided  from  the  parts  that  are  visible»  as 
they  have  been  broken  to  pieces  by  people  visiting  the  spot. 

Many  conflicting  opinions  have  been  started  by  antiquarians  as  to  the  means  em- 
ployed in  forming  these  extraordinary  works,  but  they  have  not  yet,  I  think,  received  the 
light  of  any  clear  and  satisfactory  explanation.  This  is  a  very  imperfect  specimen,  and 
ill  prepared  for  examination,  but  a  single  glance  at  it  is  sufficient  to  convince  any  one,  not 
system-mad,  that  the  stones,  scorched,  blistered,  and  vitrified  as  they  are,  were  not  thrown 
up  by  a  volcano.  That  they  were  disposed  into  their  present  form  by  the  hands  of  man 
there  cannot  be  a  question,  and  even  had  they  been  discovered  in  heaps  bearing  no  marks 
of  artificial  arrangement,  the  general  appearance  of  the  hill  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
determine  that  they  could  not  be  volcanic  remains. 

In  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  there  are  several  of  these  forts,  far  more  remarkable 
than  this,  from  their  magnitude,  the  art  and  skilful  contrivance  that  they  discover,  and  the 
complete  vitrification  of  the  materials  of  which  they  are  composed.  The  most  extraor- 
dinary work  of  the  kind  is  that  on  Craig  Phadrick,  a  conical  hill  of  no  great  height,  on 
the  borders  of  Loch  Ness.  This  hill  seems  to  have  been  fortified,  with  respect  to  the 
disposition  of  the  walls,  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  a  variety  of  hills  described  by 
Pennant,  in  North  Wales.  Surrounding  the  summit  is  a  wall  of  considerable  height,  and 

great 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  217 

great  thickness,  below  which  is  another,  and  various  rude  works  of  defence  guarding  the 
approaches  where  danger  was  most  to  be  apprehended.  The  walls  seem  to  have  been 
reduced  to  a  state  of  perfect  fusion,  forming  solid  masses,  which  adhere  firmly  to  the 
native  rock.  On  the  east  side,  where  the  hill  is  easily  accessible,  it  is  defended  by  a 
prodigious  mound  of  vitrified  matter,  above  forty  feet  in  thickness.  It  is  not  easy  to 
conceive  by  what  means  a  sufficient  degree  of  heat  was  applied  to  these  vast  masses,  to 
produce  so  powerful  an  effect  on  them.  That  the  walls  were  designedly  subjected  to  the 
action  of  fire,  for  the  purpose  of  cementing,  or  rather  consolidating  their  parts,  has  been 
the  general  opinion,  though  it  is  controverted  in  an  article  in  the  Edinburgh  Philosophical 
Transactions,  in  which  the  fort  on  Craig  Phadrick,  and  several  others  on  hills  in  the  same 
neighbourhood,  are  very  minutely  described,  and  the  vitrification  of  the  walls  explained 
as  the  accidental  effect  of  fire  on  combustible  materials,  which  composed  a  large  part  of 
their  substance.  The  writer  of  the  article  in  question  imagines  that  on  building  one  of 
these  forts,  the  work  was  begun  by  planting  a  double  row  of  strong  stakes  in  the  ground, 
in  the  form  of  the  intended  structure;  and  that  in  the  intermediate  space  were  thrown  the 
boughs  and  trunks  of  trees,  and  quantities  of  earth  and  stones,  which  were  all  bound 
firmly  together  by  branches  of  trees  interlaced  on  the  top  and  sides,  according  to  a  com- 
mon mode  of  building  of  the  highest  antiquity,  described  by  Palladio.  A  wall  con- 
structed in  this  manner,  it  is  added,  on  ground  by  nature  rugged  and  difficult  of  access, 
would  have  been  strong  enough  to  resist  the  ordinary  means  of  attack  in  the  power  of  a 
rude  people,  but  would  have  been  ver}'  liable  to  injury  from  fire,  which  would,  no  doubt, 
have  been  sometimes  successfully  employed  by  a  besieging  enemy,  and  which,  when 
once  fairly  lodged,  might  easily,  it  is  supposed,  with  the  assistance  of  the  wind,  have 
spread  into  a  general  conflagration  through  every  part  of  the  work,  reducing  it  to  the  state 
in  which  we  now  see  it. 

Those,  however,  who  are  anxious  that  all  the  doubts  and  difficulties  which  occur  to 
them  on  the  subject  of  these  masses  of  vitrification  should  subside  into  the  tranquillity  of 
complete  conviction,  will  not  feel  satisfied  with  this  explanation.  The  means  stated  are 
utterly  and  palpably  inadequate  to  the  effect  that  has  been  produced.  A  mound  of 
stones,  forty  feet  in  thickness,  could  certainly  not  have  been  melted  down  to  a  state  of 
perfect  fusion  by  a  fire  supplied  with  no  other  fuel  but  the  branches  of  trees  that  were 
bound  round  it.  The  heat  so  produced  might  possibly  have  vitrified  the  external  stones 
of  the  wall,  but  would  unquestionably  have  been  insufficient  to  penetrate  through  the 
whole  mass,  and  reduce  it  to  one  solid  body  of  vitrification.  A  modern  stone  house,  with 
its  furniture,  has,  no  doubt,  a  much  greater  quantity  of  combustible  materials  in  it,  pro- 
portioned to  its  weight  of  stone,  than  were  mixed  in  the  walls  of  these  ancient  forts,  yet 
we  often  see  them  burnt  to  the  bare  walls,  without  the  slightest  appearance  of  that 
effect,  the  probability  of  which  is  here  contended  for.  The  boughs  and  trunks  of  trees  are 
mentioned  as  being  thrown  together  with  stones  into  the  space  between  the  rows  of  stakes, 

VOL.  II.  F  P  tO 


218  VOYAGE  HOUND  GREAT  BRITAIN". 

to  account,  I  suppose,  for  the  entire  fusion  of  the  mass ;  but  it  is  not  likely  that  such 
materials  were  used  with  such  lavish  extravagance,  as  they  could  not  be  found  in  any 
great  profusion  on  the  spot,  and  were  not  nearly  so  well  calculated  for  the  construction  of 
a  wall  as  stones,  which  might  be  picked  up  in  unlimited  abundance  on  the  rocky  bounda- 
ries of  Loch  Ness.  The  builders,  too,  of  these  forts  would  scarcely,  without  some  pressing 
necessity,  have  employed  a  material  so  dangerous  to  their  security,  and  which,  as  it 
is  stated,  exposed  them  to  the  only  mode  of  offence  by  which  they  could  readily  be 
injured.  It  may  be  doubted,  perhaps,  admitting  that  the  trunks  of  trees  made  up  as 
large  a  portion  of  the  walls  as  is  asserted,  whether  fire  would  have  been  a  very  formidable 
engine  in  the  power  of  the  assailants ;  whether  the  besieged  might  not  have  remained 
unhurt  in  the  enclosed  space,  while  the  walls  were  burning  around  them.  In  this  view  of 
the  subject,  it  might  be  conceived  that  the  wood  was  employed  by  the  builders  of 
the  forts,  that  when  all  other  means  of  defence  had  failed  they  might  fly  to  their  torches, 
and  intrench  themselves  in  a  circle  of  fire.  This,  indeed,  appears  very  unlikely,  as  a  con- 
flagration could  not  have  been  raised  in  a  moment,  on  a  sudden  emergency,  from  grounds 
so  prepared ;  and  it  is  still  more  unlikely,  that  in  the  hands  of  the  assailants  a  little  fire, 
hastily  applied  to  the  exterior  of  the  wall,  could  have  penetrated  through  obstructions  of 
stone  to  the  wood  within.  But  it  is  useless  to  reason  on  suppositions  that  are  obviously 
fallacious.  The  remains  of  the  walls  distinctly  prove  that  their  principal  bulk  was  com- 
posed of  stone ;  and  by  whatever  means  the  heat  was  applied  that  vitrified  them,  it  must 
have  been  very  intense,  and  long  continued,  and  could  not,  most  undoubtedly,  have  been 
supported  by  the  stakes,  and  the  wattling  of  wood  which  may  have  surrounded  them. 

But  if  such  objections  did  not  lie  against  this  explanation  of  the  causes  that  operated 
in  the  formation  of  these  singular  structures,  their  rarity,  as  it  appears  to  me,  would 
be  sufficient  to  over-rule  it.  If  the  compound  kind  of  masonry,  which  it  is  maintained 
was  adopted  in  raising  these  walls,  was  the  common  system  of  building  of  the  country, 
and  if  fire  was  the  only  instrument  of  offence  by  which  they  could  be  effectually  attacked, 
vitrified  forts  would  be  seen  in  much  greater  abundance;  for  it  is  incredible,  that  through 
ages  of  perpetual  warfare  a  nation  would  meet  with  no  more  than  half  a  dozen  reverses 
in  its  places  of  strength.  At  the  remote  period  when  these  forts  were  raised,  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Ireland  and  Wales,  being  from  the  same  stock,  had,  no  doubt,  with  the  same 
language  and  customs,  the  same  modes  of  art  in  the  construction  of  their  fortifications  as 
those  of  the  Highlands  of  Scotland ;  but  though  hill-forts,  resembling  those  of  the  High- 
lands in  their  general  plan,  are  very  numerous  in  both  those  countries,  no  one  has  ever 
been  seen  bearing  the  least  marks  of  exposure  to  fire.  I  have  seen  many  in  Wales,  con- 
sisting invariably  of  vast  dry  walls  of  stone,  of  far  more  strength  and  durability  than  such 
structures  as  are  stated  to  have  been  the  foundations  of  the  vitrified  forts.  Indeed,  at  no 
great  distance  from  Craig  Phadrick,  there  is  a  hill  fortified  by  similar  walls,  still  in  parts 
entire,  and  unmixed  with  wood. 

Upon 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  219 

Upon  the  whole,  I  think,  the  common  opinion  is  the  least  objectionable  one,  that 
these  forts  were  exposed  to  fire  by  the  builders  of  them,  who,  not  having  attained  to  the 
art  of  uniting  stones  by  cement,  hit  upon  this  expedient,  accidentally  disclosed  to  them, 
perhaps,  by  the  action  of  fire  on  some  beacon,  as  a  means  of  compacting  them  together. 
How  such  immense  masses  were  ignited  is  another  question,  but  not  the  most  distressing 
one,  for  if  they  were  subjected  to  this  process  of  vitrification,  for  a  purpose  that  must  have 
been  equally  essential  to  all  the  forts  in  the  country,  there  still  remains  the  difficulty  of 
accounting  for  their  rarity.  If  there  had  been  only  one  or  two  of  them,  one  might  have 
conceived  that  they  were  designed  as  places  of  superior  strength,  worked  out  with 
uncommon  labour  and  skill,  for  the  chief  regulus  of  the  country,  or  the  great  ministers  of 
religion,  in  times  of  urgent  danger;  but  they  are  too  numerous  for  us  to  admit  of  any  such 
special  purposes  in  their  design,  and  yet  too  rare  for  us  to  suppose  that  they  were  formed 
with  this  extraordinary  strength  and  solidity  merely  as  common  military  works.  One  can 
imagine  no  exclusive  and  peculiar  cause  that  should  have  denied  them  to  Ireland  and 
Wales,  the  people  of  which  countries  were  equally  interested  in  having  a  refuge  of  the 
utmost  security  for  their  princes  and  priests,  and  in  availing  themselves  of  every  art  that 
could  give  strength  to  their  ordinary  fortifications.  My  reader  will  perceive  that  I  have 
nearly  expended  myself  upon  the  subject,  and  will  distinctly  see  that  this  multiplication 
of  doubts  and  negatives  does  not  bespeak  the  pride  of  a  man  who  is  big,  or  fancies  himself 
to  be  big  with  some  mighty  discovery.  I  have,  in  truth,  nothing  affirmative  to  offer  on 
this  dark  topic,  for  the  difficulties  that  I  have  mentioned  meet  me  at  every  turn  that  I 
take  in  the  labyrinth  of  conjecture;  and  as  I  strive,  in  vain,  to  see  through  them,  or  jump 
over  them,  I  must  give  up  the  struggle,  and  confess  myself  overcome.  I  had  conceived 
it  probable  that  these  vitrified  forts  were  designed — but  no — these  are  like  more  last 
words,  and  would  come  with  so  ill  a  grace,  that  they  shall  not  escape  me. 

Pursuing  my  journey,  the  next  object  that  demanded  ray  attention  was  Cardoness 
castle,  formerly  the  seat  of  the  JVTCullocks,  one  of  the  most  ancient  families  in  Gallo- 
way. It  stands  on  a  high  mount,  made  steep  on  every  side  by  art.  The  building  is 
small,  consisting  of  one  square  tower,  which  presents  nothing  to  the  eye  but  four  black 
sides  of  stone — a  specimen  of  the  utmost  degree  of  plainness  that  masonry  can  admit  of.  The 
rooms  are  as  little  decorated  as  the  walls  without,  and  very  small,  the  whole  interior  not 
containing  space  enough  for  such  accommodations  as  an  humble  family  of  the  present  day 
would  consider  necessary  to  their  comfort.  The  entrance  opens  directly  upon  a  flight 
of  stone  stairs ;  and  one  is  puzzled  to  discover,  as  I  have  observed  of  other  Scottish  castles, 
what  apartments  were  reserved  for  the  lower  functionaries  of  the  household,  the  indispensa- 
ble cook,  and  others  of  minor  importance.  The  castle,  however,  in  spite  of  its  exceed- 
ing rudeness,  Avhen  seen  from  a  little  distance,  and  combined  with  the  scenery  of  a  very 
picturesque  bay,  is  a  good  object,  possessing  the  interest  of  evident  antiquity,  and  not 
without  some  appearance  of  dignity. 

r  F  2  The 


220  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

The  old  castles  that  are  thickly  scattered  over  Scotland  strike  one  generally  as  ex- 
tremely mean  and  insignificant,  combining  none  of  those  imposing  qualities  of  grandeur 
and  power  that  we  are  accustomed  to  consider  as  natural  to  every  fabric  distinguished  by 
the  title  of  castle.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  they  were  not  national  fortresses, 
designed  for  the  reception  of  regular  troops,  and  trusted  to  the  charge  of  governors  acting 
for  the  public  service,  but  the  houses  merely  of  private  individuals,  built  with  the  strength 
of  castles,  and  so  called  in  those  lawless  times,  when  every  gentleman  lived  in  his  house 
•with  no  other  defence  against  violence  and  plunder  than  thick  walls  and  guarded  doors. 
They  are  all  in  the  same  style  of  plainness,  or  rudeness  rather,  and  formed  most  gloomy 
and  dismal  habitations,  the  rough  gentry  of  former  days  having  little  care  for  what  modern 
delicacy  calls  convenience  and  comfort,  and  no  taste  at  all  for  elegance,  which,  indeed, 
they  could  not  well  have  combined  with  that  clumsy  solidity  so  essential  to  the  security 
of  their  houses.  But  though  without  any  kind  of  majesty,  or  any  architectural  beauty, 
these  ancient  castles  give  great  interest  to  the  country,  calling  up  the  memory  of  other 
times,  with  all  their  turbulence,  danger,  and  distrust,  as  a  contrast  to  the  peacefulness  and 
con6dence  of  the  days  we  live  in.  Here  and  there  one  of  these  black  desolate  buildings 
shews  itself,  like  a  fallen  and  forsaken  tyrant,  amongst  cheerful  farms,  and  airy  open- 
windowed  houses,  surrounded  by  fertile  fields,  smiling  under  the  hands  of  secure  in- 
dustry; and  the  traveller,  while  he  muses  on  the  days  of  its  power  and  pride,  blesses  him- 
self that  they  have  passed  away.  These  castles  are  mostly  very  entire ;  and  as  they  offer 
nothing  to  tempt  rapacity,  they  may  stand  for  ages  to  come,  the  memorials  of  a  hateful 
state  of  life  no  doubt,  hut  graced  with  a  spirit  of  boldness,  and  enterprise,  and  enthusiasm, 
which  captivates  the  imagination,  and  gives  it  something  of  the  wild  and  ardent  character 
of  romance. 

From  Cardoness  I  proceeded  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Fleet,  passing  through  the 
grounds  of  Sir  David  Maxwell,  who  has  a  delightful  house  here,  sheltered  by  fine  woods, 
and  commanding  a  view  of  the  river,  opening  between  islands  into  the  sea.  These  islands 
are  rocky  and  barren ;  but  they  have  a  pretty  effect,  and,  with  the  addition  of  a  little  wood, 
not  an  impracticable  embellishment,  might  be  made  very  ornamental.  They  lie  across  the 
mouth  of  the  estuary,  as  if  the  sea  had  burst  through  the  land  in  some  violent  irruption, 
leaving  only  these  remnants,  whose  elevation  and  solidity  preserved  them  from  destruction. 
Barlocco  and  Ardwell,  the  two  largest,  are  neither  of  them  quite  a  mile  in  circumference, 
and  lie  near  the  eastern  shore.  Murray's  Isles,  which  are  but  just  divided,  and  not  together 
so  large  as  either  of  the  other  two,  stand  in  the  centre  of  the  channel ;  and  Cat's  Craig,  or 
the  Whale  Rock  (these  names  may  have  their  history,  though  I  am  ignorant  of  it),  is  the 
smallest  of  them,  and  a  mere  rock,  lying  at  the  head  of  the  line  on  the  western  shore.  On 
the  highest  point  of  Ardwell,  the  loftiest  of  these  islands,  there  is  a  carne,  or  an  imitation 
of  one,  for  I  strongly  suspect  that  it  was  raised  very  long  indeed  after  the  age  of  Noah, 
even  by  hands  yet  warm  with  life.  I  cannot  commend  counterfeits  of  works  like  these, 

which 


Near  Carsleith,  Galloway 


Wigton,  Galloway 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  221 

which  have  not  the  slightest  claim  to  admiration  for  any  art  that  they  exhibit,  and  can  be 
interesting  only  as  monuments  of  antiquity.  To  heap  a  few  stones  together,  call  them  a 
came,  and  take  any  delight  in  the  deed,  appears  to  me  to  be  quite  unpardonable.  Be- 
sides, independent  of  the  puerility  of  the  thing,  there  is  really  something  very  ungenerous 
in  the  practice  of  such  deceitfultr  icks,  for  a  puisne  antiquary,  like  myself,  might  be 
betrayed  by  them  into  perilous  mistakes,  and  be  finding  out  the  Lord  knows  what,  in  places 
where  no  such  matter  was  ever  heard  of.  I  know  not,  for  instance,  that  I  have  not  now 
been  casting  some  very  impertinent  imputations  of  modernism  upon  a  bona  fide  carne, 
so  often  have  I  been  abused  by  counterfeits. 

As  I  advanced  up  Wigton  Bay,  the  coast  gradually  became  less  rugged  and  broken, 
still  rising  in  steep  rocky  cliffs,  but  not  so  lofty,  or  so  much  indented,  as  the  more  ex- 
posed coast  at.  the  entrance  of  the  hay.  About.  Haifa  mile,  above  the  mouth  of  the  Fleet 
is  a  moat,  a  square  mount,  raised  on  a  projecting  point  of  rock,  guarded  towards  the 
sea  by  inaccessible  precipices,  and  on  the  land  side  by  a  deep  trench.  A  little  further 
on  I  stopped  to  gaze  at  a  very  singular  point,  called  Saddle  Leap,  running  out  like 
a  wall,  so  narrow  along  the  summit  that  a  man  would  scarcely  venture  to  walk  upon 
it,  but  spreading  out  considerably  towards  the  base,  and  shewing  a  rugged  and  cavern- 
ous front.  This  was  the  last  mass  of  rock  that  I  observed  on  this  side  of  Wigton  Bay, 
the  shore  higher  up  being  bounded  by  a  steep  bank,  covered  with  coppice  wood,  which 
continues  for  a  mile  or  two,  when  it  terminates  in  a  sandy  flat.  The  county  inland 
rises  gradually  from  the  shore  to  a  considerable  height,  and  has  a  very  pleasing  appear- 
ance, being  ornamented  with  a  profusion  of  natural  wood,  which  spreads  itself  in 
immense  thickets  over  the  hills.  The  trees  are  cut  once  in  twenty  years,  a  practice 
which  the  lovers  of  the  picturesque  will  certainly  cry  out  against,  and  which  some  of 
the  learned  in  agricultural  economy  contend  is  not  only  a  cruel  waste  of  beauty,  but  the 
worst  plan  of  turning  trees  to  account,  considered  merely  as  objects  of  profit.  It  is 
one,  however,  by  which  they  are  made  to  yield  a  speedy  if  not  a  large  return,  a  con- 
sideration of  pressing  importance  to  planters,  who  must  look  to  their  own  benefit,  and 
cannot  afford  to  put  off  the  harvest  of  their  lands  to  the  season  of  their  posterity. 

The  whole  stage  between  Gatehouse  and  Creetown,  at  the  head  of  Wigton  Bay,  has 
been  stated  to  be  one  of  the  finest  rides  in  Scotland,  and,  as  far  as  my  observation  has 
extended,  I  am  not  disposed  to  think  that  such  signal  praise  is  unmeasured  and  un- 
deserved. A  fine  level  road,  carried  along  the  shore  the  whole  way,  must  be  mentioned 
as  one  circumstance  in  its  favour,  and  the  sea  on  one  side,  and  lofty  hills  on  the  other, 
spread  with  wood  and  diversified  by  gentlemen's  seats  and  parks,  with  here  and  there  an 
old  castle,  complete  the  sum  of  its  attractions.  A  few  hundred  yards  beyond  the  strange 
point  of  Saddle  Leap,  the  castle  ofBarholm  just. shews  its  black  walls  above  the  woods  to 
the  right  of  the  road,  and  about  a  mile  and  a  half  farther  on  stands  Carsluth,  on  the 
border  of  the  sea.  Both  these  castles  are  so  like  that  of  Cardoness,  that  they  will  not 

require 


222  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

require  from  me  any  particular  description.  Over  the  doorway  of  Barholm  is  some 
sculpture  representing  a  folded  serpent,  death's  heads,  with  several  non-descript  monsters; 
and  over  that  of  Carsluth  is  a  coat  of  arms,  with  the  initials  I.  B.  inscribed ;  the  motto, 
Dominus  Fortitude — and  the  date  9th  of  November,  1561. 

High  up  on  the  hill,  which  rises  above  Carsluth,  is  a  splendid  house,  built  some 
years  ago  by  Sir  Samuel  Hannaw,  but  never  inhabited  nor  perfectly  finished.  With 
every  decoration  about  it  suited  to  the  dignity  of  rank  and  wealth,  it  reminds  one,  silent 
and  deserted  as  it  is,  of  one  of  those  fabled  mansions  whose  haunted  chambers  no  one 
dares  to  enter.  It  is  in  a  most  charming  situation,  screened  on  all  sides  by  wood  except 
in  front,  where  a  sloping  lawn  spreads  before  it,  and  gives  it  an  uninterrupted  view  of 
the  open  sea,  and  the  deep  inlet  of  Wigton  Bay,  with  every  creek  and  promontory  along 
its  western  shore. 

I  observed  nothing  else  particularly  worthy  of  remark  till  I  arrived  at  Creetown,  a 
large  village,  which  owed  its  origin,  or  at  least  three  fourths  of  its  extent,  to  the  introduc- 
tion of  cotton-factories,  and  has  shewn  more  instant  and  obvious  signs  of  distress  from 
the  failure  of  the  great  means  on  which  it  rested  for  support  than  Gatehouse.  Its  situa- 
tion is  quite  romantic  in  itself,  and  commands  an  extensive  and  various  prospect.  It 
stands  close  on  the  border  of  the  bay,  backed  immediately  by  wooded  banks  and  glens, 
and  flanked  on  each  side  by  a  rapid  and  noisy  burn.  Nor  far  from  it  to  the  east  rises  the 
vast  hill  of  Larg,  black  with  heath,  and  to  the  northward  appear  clear  and  distinct  the 
majestic  mountains  of  Cairnsmuir  and  Minigaff.  In  front  is  a  beautiful  view  of  the  bay, 
with  the  pretty  town  of  Wigton  directly  opposite,  covering  the  face  of  a  hill  which  slopes 
gently  to  the  water. 

There  is  one  good  street  in  Creetown,  but  it  has  straggling  lines,  and  disorderly 
clusters  of  shabby  cottages  branching  from  it,  which  prove  that  it  had  not  a  single  and 
controlling  master  to  preside  over  its  design,  like  Gatehouse.  The  Money  Pool,  one  of 
the  burns  which  passes  by  it,  and  discharges  itself  into  the  Cree,  a  few  hundred  yards 
from  the  shore,  is  navigable  at  high  water  up  to  the  village  for  vessels  of  forty  or  fifty 
tons.  There  is  a  ferry  here  over  the  Cree,  from  the  western  side  of  which  people  at  low 
water  may  walk  two  or  three  miles  across  the  sands  to  Wigton,  though  from  the  inter- 
vention of  several  small  rivers,  and  the  wetness  of  the  sands,  the  passage  is  very  disagree- 
able. It  should  not  be  attempted  after  much  rain,  for  the  rivers,  though  small,  are  often 
so  swollen  and  run  with  such  violence,  that  they  cannot  be  forded  with  safety.  I  was 
detained  here  for  five  hours  in  a  state  of  extreme  agitation,  waiting  for  a  young  lad  who 
had  been  despatched  for  me  by  the  ferryman  to  Wigton  for  letters.  He  might  have  been 
back,  it  was  said,  with  ease  in  two  hours,  and  when  three  had  elapsed  while  he  was  yet 
absent,  his  mother  became  distracted  with  alarm,  lest  he  should  have  been  carried  away 
in  crossing  one  of  the  rivers.  Her  husband,  or  she  herself,  who  had  sent  away  a  boy  too 
young  to  be  trusted,  were  the  only  persons  deserving  of  reproach,  but  as  he  was  em- 
ployed 


Cree-town,  Kirkcudbrightshire 


Dunsky  Castle,  near  Port  Patrick,  Wigtownshire 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  223 

ployed  for  my  service,  I  felt  an  extraordinary  degree  of  anxiety  about  him,  and  when  his 
mother,  who  with  straining  eyes  and  a  beating  heart  had  long  been  keeping  watch  by  the 
river's  side,  screamed  out  that  she  saw  him,  I  felt  a  joy  exceeded  only  by  her  own.  The 
youth,  a  fine  little  fellow,  made  his  appearance  with  a  free,  bold  countenance,  for  he  had 
in  fact  been  exposed  to  no  danger,  and  had  been  delayed  by  the  irresistible  attractions  of 
a  game  at  marbles  with  some  of  his  friends  at  Wigton. 

I  proceeded  from  Creetown  through  a  black  valley  of  peat-moss  to  Newton-Stewajt, 
which,  according  to  the  plan  of  my  voyage,  does  not  properly  come  under  my  considera- 
tion, and  which  formed  the  boundary  of  my  summer's  excursion. 


END  OF  VOL.   II. 


ERRATA. 

ge  21,  line  4,  for  eminary,  read  seminary. 
44,  line  25,  for  confidentl,  read  confidently. 
54,  line  22,  for  Lord  Selkirk,  read  Lord  Kirhuall. 


56, 
72, 

75, 

88, 

95, 

99,  line  3g,  for  in  Ikose,  read  in  these. 
1 10,  line  •  7,  for  It  situation,  read  Its  situation. 
151,  line  36,  for  trad,  read  track. 


ine  23,  for  look  about  upon,  read  look  upon. 
ine  39,  utter  feeling,  place  a  semicolon, 
ine  10,  for  Epicureans,  read  Epicures, 
ine  5,  fur  toit/t  care,  read  with  ease. 
ine  16,  for  or  of  any,  read  of  any. 


VOYAGE 

ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN, 


UNDERTAKEN  IN  THE  SUMMER  OF  THE  YEAR  1813, 


AND  COMMENCING  FROM  THE  LAND'S-END,  CORNWALL. 


WITH 


A  SERIES  OF  VIEWS, 

Jltastrattoe  of  tfje  Character  anti  prominent  jTeatures  of  tfce  Coast, 
BY  WILLIAM  DANIELL,  A.R.A. 


VOL.  III. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED   FOR   LONGMAN,    HURST,    REES,    ORME,    AND   BROWN,    PATERNOSTER-ROW 
AND    WILLIAM   DANIELL,    NO.    9,    CLEVELAND-STREET,    F1TZROY-SQUARE. 

1818. 


T.  DAVISON,  LOMBARD-STREET,   WHITEFRIARS,   LONDON. 


TO 


WALTER  SCOTT,  ESQ. 


SIR, 


IN  completing  the  present  portion  of  my  undertaking,  I  look  back 
with  grateful  feelings  on  the  time  when  I  was  occupied  in  collecting  the 
materials  for  it.  The  many  acts  of  kindness  and  hospitality  which  cheered 
my  voyage  along  the  western  coast  and  isles  of  Scotland,  greatly  facilitated 
the  attainment  of  its  objects,  and  almost  converted  it  into  an  excursion  of 
pleasure.  I  am  glad  to  acknowledge,  Sir,  that  the  introductions  you  had 
the  politeness  to  give  me  were  very  efficacious  in  procuring  for  me  these 
advantages ;  and  that  I  derived  great  benefit  from  the  remarks  you  made 
to  me  in  conversation  respecting  a  region  which  you  had  recently  explored 
with  a  poet's  eye,  and  which  your  genius  has  rescued  from  obscurity. 

The  present  series  of  views,  however  humble  their  merit,  will  in  some 
degree  associate  themselves  with  the  vivid  pictures  which  your  last  great 
poem  presents  of  the  magnificent  scenery  of  the  Isles.  To  whom  then 
can  I  dedicate  them  with  so  much  propriety  as  to  you  ?  If  that  were  a 
question  upon  which  it  were  possible,  without  presumption,  to  take  the 
sense  of  the  British  public,  the  mention  of  your  name  would  be  greeted 


DEDICATION. 

with  a  general  smile  of  approval,  and  the  highest  circles  would  cheerfully 
acquiesce  in  such  a  preference.  Few  names  are  so  cordially,  so  "  freshly 
remembered;"  few  are  endeared  by  so  many  pleasing  recollections.  Under 
such  sanction,  I  may  trust  that  these  labours  will  obtain  generally  that 
indulgent  regard  which  your  good-nature  will  bestow  on  them.  Through 
you,  Sir,  I  may  also  most  effectually  convey  this  public  acknowledgment 
of  the  hospitalities  and  kind  assistance  which  I  have  received  in  Scotland, 
and  which  animate  my  hopes  of  success  in  hastening  to  the  prosecution 
of  my  voyage.  Be  pleased  to  accept  this  testimonial  of  respect,  and 
believe  me, 

Sir, 
Your  obliged  and  faithful  Servant, 

W.  DANIELL. 

Cleveland-street ,  London, 
April,  1818. 


VOYAGE 
ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN,  &c. 


THE  country  on  which  we  are  about  to  enter  is  one  of  the  most  picturesque  in  the  whole 
circuit  of  the  island.  It  has  been  repeatedly  explored  and  described;  but  the  curiosity 
of  the  public  respecting  it  is  still  unsatisfied,  especially  in  whatever  regards  the  illustration 
derived  from  the  pencil.  None  of  the  tours  in  the  west  of  Scotland  now  extant  contain 
engravings  at  all  worthy  of  their  respective  subjects ;  and  it  is  a  matter  somewhat  sur- 
prising, that  a  tract  so  inviting  to  the  painter  should  not  have  called  forth  a  single  series 
of  views.  To  supply  this  deficiency  in  some  degree,  and  at  the  same  time  to  meet  the 
general  wishes  of  the  subscribers,  it  has  been  determined  to  effect  an  alteration  in  the 
present  work,  by  condensing  and  abridging  the  narrative,  in  order  to  make  room  for  a 
greater  proportion  of  engravings.  In  consequence  of  this  arrangement,  Mr.  Ayton's 
account  of  the  voyage  is  to  be  considered  as  terminating  at  the  close  of  the  preceding 
volume. 

The  shire  of  Wigton,  on  the  east  frontier  of  which  this  narrative  is  resumed,  has  a  sea- 
coast  of  more  than  130  miles  in  extent,  comprehending  three  fine  bays,  and  possessing 
many  natural  advantages  for  the  establishment  of  an  extensive  commerce.  These  ad- 
vantages, however,  are  at  present  of  little  avail,  except  in  the  export  of  agricultural 
produce  to  the  Scottish,  English,  and  Irish  markets,  and  they  are  not  likely  to  be  speedily 
improved.  The  want  of  coal,  a  defect  incident  to  this  county  in  common  with  almost  the 
whole  southern  border  of  Scotland,  must  be  considered  a  circumstance  unfavourable  to 
the  introduction  and  spread  of  manufactures,  and  of  course  to  the  extension  of  that  species 
of  trade  which  is  connected  with  them. 

The  mountain  scenery  which  is  viewed  from  the  road  between  Newton  Stewart  and 
Wigton  is  uncommonly  grand,  though  not  picturesque,  the  forms  of  the  mountains  being 
too  vast,  and  the  outlines  heavy  and  undulating.  The  lower  hills,  being  in  general  free 
from  projecting  rocks,  are  very  accessible  to  the  plough;  and  it  is  observable  that  the 
richest  lands  lie  near  the  coast,  where  the  means  of  improvement  are  most  abundant. 
VOL.  JH.  B  The 


2  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BlilTAIK. 

The  royal  burgh  of  Wigton  is  a  small  decent  town,  situated  near  the  mouth  of  a  stream 
called  Bladenoch,  on  an  eminence  at  a  considerable  elevation  from  the  sea.  In  this 
respect  it  differs  from  the  small  towns  on  the  coast,  which  are  generally  situated  in  valleys. 
It  commands  a  very  striking  and  extensive  view  of  the  bay.  The  scarcity  of  fuel  is  one  of 
its  «reatest  disadvantages ;  peat,  which  is  the  only  kind  consumed  here,  is  procured  from 
a  tract  in  the  neighbourhood,  of  about  two  miles  in  length,  and  one  and  a  half  in  breadth, 
which  bears  all  the  marks  of  having  been  once  covered  by  the  sea.  The  soil  consists  of 
a  kind  of  sea-slime  condensed  into  a  hard  substance  of  great  depth,  intermixed  with  strata 
of  shells.  It  is  almost  one  uninterrupted  level,  considerably  lower  than  the  rest  of  the  parish. 
This  tract,  after  the  receding  of  the  sea,  must  have  been  covered  with  wood,  as  trunks  of 
trees  are  still  found  in  great  numbers  interspersed  through  the  whole  of  it.  They  are  mostly 
oak;  many  of  them  between  thirty  and  forty  feet  long,  and  lying  generally  in  such  a 
direction  as  if  they  had  yielded  to  the  force  of  the  west  wind,  which  is  most  violent  in 
these  districts.  A  great  part  of  the  tract  has  been  cleared  ;  nearly  the  half  of  it,  however,  is 
still  covered  with  moss  in  some  places,  to  the  depth  of  from  five  to  ten  feet,  under  which, 
lying  on  the  stratum  of  clay,  the  trees  are  mostly  found. 

Between  Wigton  and  Burrowhead  is  Galloway-house,  the  seat  of  the  Earl  of  Galloway, 
the  plantations  of  which  are  remarkable  for  the  successful  experiment  made  by  his  lord- 
ship in  the  propagation  of  the  pinaster  or  maritime  pine.  It  has  been  found  to  thrive 
vigorously  in  situations  so  exposed  to  the  sea  air  as  to  be  fatal  even  to  the  Scottish  fir  in 
this  south-western  district ;  and  under  its  protection  almost  any  other  wood  may  be  planted 
with  safety.  To  the  above-mentioned  nobleman  are  to  be  ascribed  several  important 
improvements  on  this  coast ;  among  others,  the  village  of  Garlieston,  founded  by  him, 
which  now  contains  between  500  and  600  inhabitants,  and  is  in  a  flourishing  state.  It 
stands  on  a  small  bay  of  the  same  name,  and  is  built  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,  with  a  good 
inn.  The  vessels  belonging  to  it  are  employed  in  the  coasting  trade.  About  a  mile  beyond 
Galloway-house  are  the  ruins  of  Craigillan  Castle,  totally  dilapidated,  with  the  exception 
of  one  small  arch.  Its  situation  is  high,  and  the  coast  about  it,  for  a  short  distance  either 
way,  is  very  rocky. 

Near  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula  formed  by  the  bay  of  Wigton  and  the  bay  of  Luce 
stands  the  royal  burgh  of  Whithorn.  In  ancient  times  it  was  a  place  of  some  consequence, 
being  the  capital  of  the  Novantes,  a  British  tribe  who  possessed  all  Galloway  beyond  the 
river  Dee.  It  was  also  a  Roman  station.  The  town  at  present  consists  chiefly  of  one  street, 
running  north  and  south,  intersected  by  several  cross  lanes.  The  town-hall  is  adorned  with 
a  spire,  and  turrets  furnished  with  a  set  of  bells.  The  isle  of  Whithorn  has  a  small,  convenient 
pier,  and  is  considered  a  safe  port,  from  which,  with  fair  winds,  vessels  may  sail  to  Whitehaven 
in  four  hours,  to  the  Isle  of  Man  in  three,  to  Dublin,  Greenock,  or  Liverpool,  in  eighteen 
hours.  Here  are  the  vestiges  of  a  church  dedicated  to  St.  Martin,  which  was  founded  in 
the  fourth  century  by  Ninian,  after  he  had  been  ordained  a  bishop  of  the  Britons. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 


The  coast  from  Whithorn  to  Port  William  is  rocky  and  rather  low,  except  about  the 
cape  or  point  of  Burrowhead,  where  it  is  rather  lofty,  and  very  rugged.  From  it  the  Isle 
of  Man  is  seen  distinctly,  and  appears  high  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Port  William  is  a 
place  of  miserably  cheerless  aspect,  having  few  of  the  characteristics  of  a  port  except  a 
diminutive  pier  for  small  vessels.  This  side  of  Glenluce  bay  is  altogether  bleak  and  dreary, 
presenting  a  bold  and  rocky  shore,  with  scarcely  a  tree  visible,  for  the  greater  part  of  the 
way  to  Glenluce. 

This  village  lies  at  the  extremity  of  the  bay  to  which  it  gives  name,  in  a  pretty 
sequestered  glen,  well  sheltered  with  wood.  Near  it  are  the  ruins  of  Glenluce  Abbey, 
which  was  founded  in  the  year  1190,  by  Holland,  lord  of  Galloway,  and  constable  of 
Scotland.  The  chapter-house  still  remains  entire,  together  with  some  adjoining  vaults,  and 
two  gables  of  the  western  part  of  the  church.  In  the  middle  of  the  apartment  belonging 
to  the  former  is  a  pillar  about  fourteen  feet  high,  from  which  eight  arches  spring,  and 
terminate  in  the  surrounding  walls.  This  pillar,  probably  from  the  hazard  attending  its 
removal,  has  escaped  the  general  destruction,  and  is  still  admired  for  its  just  proportions. 
The  centre  of  every  arch  is  adorned  with  figures  and  foliage.  The  zeal  for  reformation, 
which,  two  centuries  ago,  made  such  havoc  among  monastic  edifices,  was  so  intense  and 
unsparing  in  Scotland,  that  a  relic  of  this  kind  excites  interest  merely  by'its  rarity. 

The  road  from  Glenluce  to  Capel  Rossan  extends  over  the  sands  for  about  eight  miles. 
In  the  course  of  this  ride  an  incident  occurred  which  was  rather  amusing.  It  was  ebb  tide, 
and  a  large  dog-fish,  which  had  ventured  too  far  at  flood,  was  stranded ;  in  which  situation 
a  flock  of  arctic  gulls  observing  that  his  retreat  was  cut  off,  made  a  seemingly  concerted 
attack  upon  him.  He  flounced  about  and  defended  himself  with  all  his  might,  but  the 
odds  were  so  great,  and  he  so  much  out  of  his  element,  that  victory  soon  declared  in  favour 
of  the  gulls.  Having  deprived  him  of  life,  they  were  hastening  to  devour  him,  when  the 
largest  and  strongest  bird  in  the  flock  mounted  his  carcase,  and  keeping  all  the  rest  at  bay, 
deliberately  fell  to,  nor  would  he  suffer  a  single  gull  to  taste  a  morsel  until  he  had  satisfied 
his  appetite.  The  right  of  the  strongest,  it  may  be  supposed,  would  be  claimed  in  suc- 
cession by  only  a  few,  who,  having  picked  the  choicest  of  the  fare,  would  leave  the  scraps 
and  offal  to  the  indiscriminate  multitude.  Numerous  flocks  of  these  arctic  gulls,  distinguish- 
able by  the  black  back  and  white  breast,  are  to  be  met  with  about  these  shores.  They 
are  by  nature  extremely  wild,  and  withal  extremely  voracious.  About  three  years  ago 
they  were  so  tamed  by  the  severity  of  the  winter,  that  they  approached  the  huts,  and, 
mingling  with  the  poultry,  picked  up  whatever  food  they  could  find. 

The  Mull  of  Galloway,  in  proceeding  to  which  it  was  necessary  to  have  a  guide,  is  a 
rugged  and  rather  lofty  headland,  forming  the  western  horn  of  Glenluce  bay,  and  the  most 
southern  point  of  Scotland.  At  certain  periods  of  the  tide  a  strong  current  sets  against  it 
with  extreme  rapidity.  It  is  unfortunately  destitute  of  a  light-house,  though  the  measure 
of  erecting  one  has  been  repeatedly  suggested,  and  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  peculiar 

B  2  dangers 


4  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

dangers  attending  navigation  in  this  sea.  In  dark  and  hazy  weather  vessels  sometimes 
mistake  Glenluce  bay  for  the  Irish  channel,  and,  when  keeping  a  northerly  course,  run  on 
shore  between  Glenluce  and  the  Mull  of  Galloway.  Such  a  mistake  is  almost  sure  to  be 
fatal,  as  the  ship,  when  left  by  the  tide,  remains  among  quicksands  of  such  a  retentive 
nature,  that  after-tides  serve  only  to  dash  her  in  pieces. 

A  more  rocky  coast  is  rarely  to  be  found  than  that  which  extends  between  the  Mull 
of  Galloway  and  Port  Nessick,  which  is  rather  an  open  bay,  bounded  on  either  side  by 
low  rocky  shores.  An  animated  scene  here  presented  itself,  there  being  in  the  bay  about 
an  hundred  and  fifty  sail  of  boats  on  the  herring  fishery,  each  boat  manned  with  from  five 
to  eight  men.  The  project  of  building  a  pier  at  this  port  has  been  for  some  time  in 
agitation,  the  situation  as  a  harbour  being  considered  preferable  in  every  respect  to  that  of 
Port  Patrick.  The  distance  to  the  Irish  coast  is  said  to  be  equally  short,  the  haven  more 
commodious,  and  its  entrance  less  difficult.  This  scheme  of  diverting  the  course  of  trade 
from  an  established  channel  is  liable  to  many  objections,  both  on  the  score  of  public 
convenience  and  private  interest ;  those  of  the  latter  class  may  alone  be  of  sufficient  weight 
to  cause  its  abandonment. 

Since  leaving  the  Great  Orme's  Head  in  Wales,  there  has  not  occurred  so  rugged  a 
tract  of  coast  as  that  between  the  Mull  of  Galloway  and  Port  Patrick.  It  was  necessary 
to  take  a  circuitous  route  to  the  latter  place,  the  direct  one,  along  shore,  being  quite 
impracticable. 

The  harbour  of  Port  Patrick  was  originally  a  mere  inlet  between  two  ridges  of  rocks 
which  advance  into  the  sea,  forming  a  bay  of  about  220  feet  clear  width,  and  about  550 
feet  extent  inland.  The  coast  of  Ireland  lies  right  in  front,  extending  from  S.  W.  to  N.  W. 
at  the  distance  of  about  twenty  miles.  The  ledge  of  rocks  on  the  north  side  of  the  harbour 
rises  considerably  above  high  water ;  and  as  the  land  extends  from  north  to  south,  the  quarter 
in  which  the  harbour  lay  unprotected  was  from  south  to  south-west  inclusive,  the  ledge  of 
rocks  on  the  south  side  being  too  low  to  afford  any  considerable  shelter.  Hence  in  time 
of  storms  it  was  necessary  to  run  vessels  ashore  and  secure  them  by  means  of  ropes,  on 
which  account  they  required  to  be  made  so  strong,  and  of  so  flat  a  construction,  as  not  to 
sail  except  with  the  wind  on  the  beam  or  abaft.  Hence  the  regular  intercourse  between 
Port  Patrick  and  Donaghadee  could  only  be  maintained  when  the  winds  were  northerly  or 
southerly,  and  even  then  only  by  aid  of  the  strong  current  of  the  tides  up  and  down  the 
channel.  It  was  therefore  desirable  that  the  harbour  should  be  rendered  capable  of  pro- 
tecting vessels  properly  constructed  for  sailing  at  all  points,  so  that  in  moderate  weather, 
by  the  aid  of  the  currents,  they  might  make  their  passage  good  in  all  winds. 

This  object  was  accomplished  about  the  year  1774,  by  that  eminent  engineer,  the  late 
Mr.  John  Smeaton,  under  whose  direction  the  southerly  ledge  of  rocks  was  surmounted  by 
a  pier,  from  which  another  pier  branched  out,  dividing  the  bay  into  an  inner  and  an  outer 
harbour.  The  projection  of  this  flank  pier  from  the  main  one  being  175  feet,  leaves  an 

opening 


VOVAGB    ROUKD    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  5 

opening  of  about  100  feet  between  it  and  the  nearest  point  of  the  northerly  platform  rocks, 
which  answer  the  end  of  a  counter-pier.  These  improvements,  with  the  addition  of  a 
light-house,  have  tended  greatly  to  facilitate  the  intercourse  between  this  place  and  the 
north  of  Ireland.  A  number  of  packet-boats  are  kept  here  for  the  conveyance  of  the  mail, 
and  for  the  accommodation  of  passengers. 

The  bay,  on  arriving  there,  presented  a  busy  scene :  several  sloops  from  Ireland  were 
discharging  cattle,  and  numbers  of  persons  along  shore  were  employed  in  curing  herrings. 
The  tide  here  has  considerable  force ;  and  it  is  deserving  of  notice,  that  at  Donaghadee, 
which  is  almost  directly  opposite,  the  sea  ebbs  and  flows  nearly  an  hour  sooner  than  at 
Port  Patrick.  This  phenomenon  has  been  observed  on  some  other  parts  of  the  coast. 
When  the  flood  returns,  a  strong  current  regularly  sets  from  the  Irish  shore  toward  the 
Mull  of  Galloway,  running  at  the  rate  of  seven  knots  an  hour,  and,  when  opposed  by  the 
wind,  exhibiting  the  appearance  of  breakers  for  a  considerable  distance. 

It  is  generally  believed  that  the  largest  import  of  black  cattle  from  Ireland  is  by  Port 
Patrick,  which  obtains  this  preference  on  account  of  the  shortness  of  the  passage,  a  very 
important  consideration  with  regard  to  a  cargo  so  perishable,  and  so  difficult  of  transport. 
The  town  is  small,  and  thrives  but  slowly,  as  is  generally  the  case  with  thoroughfares  of 
this  kind.  It  is  chiefly  supported  by  the  constant  concourse  of  passengers  by  the  packets, 
who  here  find  accommodation  according  to  their  circumstances,  almost  every  house  being 
an  inn.  There  is  a  class  of  useful  persons  here  whose  collective  title  has  never  found  a 
place  in  the  list  of  trades  of  any  guild,  livery,  or  corporation,  in  the  kingdom.  They  arc 
called  the  Robbery,  and  ply  at  the  harbour  as  porters  for  the  service  of  passengers  either 
landing  or  embarking.  This  designation  was  probably  conferred  upon  them  in  conse- 
quence of  their  exorbitant  charges,  and  is  certainly  a  humorous  but  effectual  way  of 
warning  the  public  against  imposition. 

About  a  mile  to  the  southward  of  Port  Patrick  stand  the  ruins  of  Dunskey  Castle,  on 
the  brink  of  a  precipice  whose  base  is  washed  by  the  sea.  It  seems  to  have  been  well 
constructed  for  defence,  and  exhibits  some  remains  of  embankments  on  the  land  side, 
which  shew  it  to  have  been  a  handsome  building.  The  access  to  it  was  over  a  draw-bridge. 
Many  of  the  squared  stones  have  been  taken  away  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  a  modern 
seat,  and  to  this  sort  of  dilapidation  the  rest  of  the  edifice  is  probably  doomed.  Its 
foundation  is  doubtless  of  ancient  date,  as  historical  mention  is  made  of  a  castle  here  so 
early  as  the  reign  of  Eugene  V.  in  the  seventh  century.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  castle 
there  is  a  cave  for  which  the  people  have  a  very  superstitious  regard,  as  being  favourable 
to  the  cure  of  infirm  persons,  particularly  of  rickety  children,  who  are  brought  here  even 
from  a  considerable  distance,  and  after  being  washed  in  a  neighbouring  stream,  are  taken 
to  the  cave  to  be  dried. 

Stranrauer  is  a  royal  burgh,  situated  at  the  inland  extremity  of  the  deep  bay,  called 
Loch  Ryan.  It  has  no  artificial  harbour,  but  ships  of  300  tons  find  good  and  safe  anchorage 

in 


6  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

in  what  is  called  the  road,  about  half  a  mile  from  the  town.  At  least  the  only  danger  in 
this  anchorage  is  during  the  prevalence  of  a  strong  north  or  north-west  wind,  accompanied 
with  a  high  tide.  The  town  is  divided  nearly  in  the  middle  by  a  rivulet,  over  which  there 
are  several  stone  bridges.  The  castle,  now  uninhabited,  is  a  very  substantial  building. 
Since  the  erection  of  the  new  town-house  and  prison,  the  place  has  undergone  several 
improvements,  and  its  trade  of  late  years  has  gradually  increased.  Upwards  of  1500  tons 
of  shipping  are  employed  in  the  coasting  trade,  and  a  few  in  the  fisheries.  Some  of  the 
largest  vessels  make  an  annual  voyage  to  Norway  and  the  Baltic,  from  which  they  import 
iron,  timber,  hemp,  &c.  The  inhabitants  are  much  annoyed  at  all  times  by  crowds  of 
Irish  vagrants,  who  come  over  and  lodge  in  the  suburbs  and  neighbouring  cottages.  Some 
of  them  bring  Irish  linens  to  barter  for  old  woollen  clothes,  which  they  receive  in  preference 
to  money,  and  return  laden  with  bales  of  these  worn-out  habiliments,  in  collecting  which 
they  penetrate  sometimes  far  into  the  interior  of  the  country. 

The  bay  of  Loch  Ryan  is  about  ten  miles  long,  extending  from  N.  "W.  to  S.  E.  and  is 
nearly  two  miles  wide  at  its  entrance,  and  four  in  its  widest  part.  On  the  east  side,  about 
a  league  from  the  mouth,  is  the  village  of  Cairn,  with  a  small  bay  affording  good  anchor- 
age, to  which  vessels  entering  or  quitting  the  Frith  of  Clyde  resort  for  shelter  in  stormy 
weather.  King  William's  fleet  anchored  here  on  their  passage  to  Ireland.  On  the  opposite 
side  of  the  bay  is  a  sand-bank  called  the  Scarr,  which  extends  a  considerable  way,  in  an 
oblique  direction,  across.  It  is  easy  for  vessels  to  avoid  it  by  keeping  near  the  east  shore. 
On  this  bank  and  on  the  shores  of  the  bay  are  found  oysters  of  excellent  flavour,  which 
might  be  procured  in  great  abundance  by  dredging.  A  variety  of  fish,  such  as  skate, 
haddocks,  whitings,  flounders,  crabs,  and  lobsters,  are  caught  here.  The  promontory 
which  forms  the  south-western  boundary  of  the  bay  is  terminated  by  Millar-point,  a 
headland  in  the  parish  of  Kirkholm. 

The  route  from  Stranrauer  to  Ballantrae,  in  Ayrshire,  was  along  the  east  coast  of  the 
bay,  and  onward  by  that  of  the  Frith  of  Clyde,  commanding  a  distant  view  of  the  crag  of 
Ailsa.  The  rocks  on  the  Ayrshire  coast  are  finely  formed,  and  richly  covered  with  vegeta- 
tion, which  produces  a  most  pleasing  effect  when  compared  with  the  bleak  and  naked 
cliffs  that  so  often  present  themselves  in  this  region. 

The  view  here  given  of  the  CRAG  OF  AILSA  is  taken  from  the  beach  near  Ballantrae. 
This  noted  and  valuable  landmark  is  said  to  be  from  800  to  900  feet  high,  and,  being 
insular,  the  abruptness  and  singularity  of  its  form  render  its  appearance  very  striking. 
At  about  a  third  of  the  ascent  stand  the  ruins  of  a  castle,  which  is  stated,  but  on  doubtful 
authority,  to  have  been  built  by  Philip  II.  of  Spain.  The  island  is  not  inhabited  by  any 
human  being,  but  affords  refuge  to  immense  flocks  of  solan  geese  and  other  sea-birds,  and 
is  stocked  by  rabbits  and  a  few  goats.  It  is  the  property  of  the  Earl  of  Cassilis,  and  is 
let  for  a  certain  sum  per  annum,  chiefly  on  account  of  the  value  of  the  birds'  feathers  pro- 
cured from  thence.  According  to  Professor  Jameson,  the  crag  seems  to  be  formed  of 

different 


The  Crag  of  Ailsa 


Culzean  Castle,  Ayrshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  7 

different  species  of  compact  sienite,  which,  particularly  on  the  east  side,  presents  immense 
groups  of  columns  similar  to  the  basaltic  columns  that  occur  so  often  in  the  west  of  Scotland. 
It  is  of  very  great  consequence  as  a  landmark  to  vessels  navigating  the  Frith  of  Clyde,  and 
constitutes  a  striking  and  very  picturesque  feature  of  this  part  of  the  coast. 

From  Ballantrae  to  Girvan  the  prospect  is  finely  varied  by  alternations  of  mountain, 
rock,  and  bay ;  and  the  inlet  called  the  Frith  of  Girvan,  with  its  rocks  covered  with  sea 
fowl,  chiefly  shags,  is  very  picturesque.  The  village  has  but  few  vessels,  and  is  of  little 
consequence  as  a  port,  its  inhabitants  being  chiefly  weavers  employed  by  the  manu- 
facturers of  Glasgow. 

The  whole  of  this  bold  coast,  which  belongs  to  the  district  of  Carrick,  in  Ayrshire, 
commands  an  extensive  prospect  of  the  sea  and  opposite  shores.  A  most  spacious  bay 
of  nearly  thirty  leagues  diameter  presents  itself,  formed  by  part  of  Galloway,  the  counties 
of  Down  and  Antrim,  in  Ireland,  the  east  coast  of  Argyleshire,  and  part  of  Dumbarton- 
shire, to  which  may  be  added  the  sea  front  of  Ayrshire,  extending  about  eighty  miles.  In 
a  clear  day  the  greater  part  of  these  tracts  of  coast  is  discernible,  together  with  the  isles 
of  Arran  and  Bute,  and  the  two  islets  of  Cumbrae  and  the  crag  of  Ailsa.  It  may  be  here 
observed  that  the  coast  of  Ayrshire  is  not  very  favourable  to  navigation,  its  extremities 
being  rocky,  and  its  midway  part  a  level  sandy  beach,  on  which  ships  are  liable  to  strike 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  shore. 

Leaving  Girvan  and  proceeding  along  the  coast,  the  next  object  of  interest  is 
CuL2EAN  CASTLE,  the  residence  of  the  Earl  of  Cassilis,  situated  on  the  verge  of  an  almost 
perpendicular  rock,  the  height  of  which  from  the  sea  is  about  100  feet.  Its  site  is  that  of 
an  ancient  castle,  which  was  the  mansion  of  that  branch  of  the  family  of  Kennedy  which 
afterwards  succeeded  to  the  title  of  Earls  of  Cassilis.  The  plan  of  the  present  edifice 
was  furnished  by  the  late  Mr.  Adam.  Few  situations  comprehend  a  greater  variety  of 
picturesque  scenery.  From  the  principal  apartments  there  is  a  fine  view  of  the  isles  of 
Arran,  Pladda,  and  Holy  Island,  with  the  whole  of  the  Frith  of  Clyde,  in  the  midst  of 
which  rises  the  bold  and  abrupt  crag  of  Ailsa.  The  vessels  continually  passing  up  and 
down  the  Frith  give  great  animation  to  the  scene. 

On  the  land  side,  and  immediately  below  the  castle,  are  the  gardens  belonging  to  the 
old  house  of  Culzean,  formed  out  of  a  rock,  at  great  expense,  into  three  terraces,  which 
are  planted  with  fruit  trees.  The  rest  of  the  grounds  are  laid  out  with  great  taste  and 
elegance. 

The  caves  of  Culzean  are  near  the  castle,  and  directly  under  some  of  the  buildings.  They 
are  six  in  number.  The  largest  of  the  three  to  the  westward  presents  the  appearance  of  two 
rocks  fallen  together  and  forming  a  very  irregular  gothic  arch,  the  highest  part  of  which  is 
about  50  feet.  It  varies  in  breadth,  and  is  in  extent  about  200  feet.  The  other  two,  with 
which  it  communicates,  are  smaller,  but  of  similar  form.  The  three  caves  to  the  eastward 
have  nearly  the  same  relative  height  and  figure,  but  their  extent  has  never  been  precisely 

ascertained. 


VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

ascertained.  They  have  likewise  a  communication  with  each  other.  The  question, 
whether  these  caves  be  natural  or  artificial,  cannot  be  decided  by  any  tradition  extant 
concerning  them,  but  some  circumstances  tend  to  prove  that  they  have  been  occupied. 
To  the  largest  of  the  three  westward  caves  there  is  a  door-way  built  of  freestone,  with  a 
window  three  feet  above  it,  of  the  same  material.  Above  both  these  there  is  an  apartment 
from  which  might  be  thrown  down  whatever  could  annoy  the  assailants  of  the  entrance. 
Traces  of  a  similar  contrivance  are  to  be  found  in  many  old  castles  in  this  country. 

At  a  small  distance  from  this  place  are  the  ruins  of  Dunure  Castle,  situated  on  a 
rock  at  a  small  elevation  from  the  sea.  In  its  vicinity  there  is  a  good  little  pier,  with  a 
convenient  harbour  for  small  vessels.  The  prospect  from  this  castle  is  very  extensive  and 
varied,  comprehending  the  craggy  mountains  of  Arran,  the  coasts  of  Kintyre  and  of  Ireland, 
the  isles  of  Bute  and  Cumbraes,  and  a  great  part  of  the  bay  of  Ayr.  This  castle  was 
formerly  a  residence  of  the  family  of  Kennedy,  from  whom,  as  we  have  already  mentioned, 
are  descended  the  Earls  of  Cassilis. 

GRINEAN  CASTLE,  a  most  singular  ruin,  stands  on  the  summit  of  a  rock  rising 
abruptly  from  the  sea,  not  far  from  the  heads  of  Ayr.  Below  it  are  some  additions  of  a 
modern  date,  which  have  never  been  finished.  From  this  place  the  TOWN  OF  AYR  has  a 
most  respectable  appearance.  It  is  situated  on  a  level  peninsula  formed  by  the  converging 
rivers  Ayr  and  Doon,  which  here  flow  into  the  sea.  Its  river  is  embellished  by  several 
good  bridges,  and  in  the  principal  street,  which  is  wide,  there  are  some  well  built  houses. 
The  town  and  its  suburb,  called  Newton  on  Ayr,  are  situated  at  some  distance  above  the 
place  where  the  vessels  lie,  though  there  are  a  few  houses  in  the  vicinage  of  the  quay. 
The  entrance  to  the  harbour  is  obstructed  by  a  sand-bank  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  the 
bed  of  which  is  narrow,  and  the  depth  of  water  not  more  than  twelve  feet  even  at  spring 
tides.  Coal  is  exported  from  hence  to  some  of  the  Irish  ports,  and  a  few  vessels  import 
timber  and  other  merchandize  from  the  Baltic. 

Between  the  town  and  the  sea  stood  the  ancient  church  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  in 
which  the  Scottish  parliament  assembled  to  confirm  the  title  of  Robert  Bruce  to  the 
throne.  The  tower  remains;  but  the  church,  of  which  the  foundations  are  still  to  be 
traced,  was  seized  by  Oliver  Cromwell,  who  converted  it  into  an  arsenal,  and  gave  the 
burgh  1000  English  merks  to  assist  in  building  their  present  place  of  worship.  There 
are  yet  some  remains  of  the  fortifications  which  Cromwell  erected  round  the  old  church. 

Along  the  coast,  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  river,  is  a  level  sandy  beach,  affording 
a  most  agreeable  ride  or  drive ;  the  country  eastward  of  the  town  is  adorned  with 
plantations. 

The  burgh  of  Newton  on  Ayr  has  a  public  property  belonging  to  it,  consisting  of 
about  200  acres  of  arable  land,  and  150  acres  of  common.  The  freemen  or  burgesses, 
limited  in  number  to  forty-eight,  possess  each  what  is  called  a  lot  or  freedom,  containing 
about  four  acres  of  arable  land,  with  right  of  pasturage  for  their  cattle  on  the  common. 

In 


Distant  View  of  Ayr 


Pier  at  Ardrossan,  Ayrshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  9 

In  them  is  vested  the  right  of  electing  the  magistrates  and  other  officers  of  the  borough. 
The  right  of  inheritance  to  these  freedoms  is  limited,  females  being  excluded  from  the 
succession.  These  properties  cannot  be  affected  by  the  debts  of  the  possessor,  though  the 
crops  on  the  ground  may  be  seized  by  his  creditors.  No  advantages  have  been  found  to 
result  from  this  singular  tenure. 

On  the  low  sandy  beach  between  Ayr  and  Irvine  is  Troon  Point,  a  small  cape,  ex- 
tending about  a  mile  into  the  sea  in  a  northerly  direction.  There  is  an  extensive  pier 
upon  it ;  but  the  natural  advantages  which  it  possesses  as  a  naval  station  of  great  con- 
venience and  security,  have  not  been  improved  in  their  full  extent.  Somewhat  more 
than  a  century  ago,  the  merchants  of  Glasgow  were  desirous  of  converting  it  into  a  sea- 
port ;  the  proprietor  of  the  adjoining  lands,  however,  had  not  public  spirit  enough  to 
coincide  with  their  views ;  he  was  fearful  that  the  establishment  of  a  populous  town  would 
distress  the  neighbourhood  by  increasing  the  price  of  the  necessaries  of  life ;  and  in  con- 
sequence of  his  rejection  of  the  overtures  made  to  him,  another  maritime  situation  was 
chosen,  on  which  was  founded  Port  Glasgow.  Troon  is  at  present  much  resorted  to  by 
sea-bathers.  About  two  miles  westward  of  the  point  is  Lady  Isle,  which  affords  safe 
anchorage  to  vessels  navigating  this  dangerous  coast,  and  is  furnished  on  the  north-west 
with  two  land-marks  or  beacons  to  indicate  the  ground. 

Irvine  stands  on  the  north  bank  of  a  river  of  the  same  name,  the  mouth  of  which, 
about  half  a  mile  distant  from  the  town,  forms  its  harbour,  from  which  are  exported  con- 
siderable quantities  of  coal,  the  produce  of  the  adjacent  district.  Its  imports  are  prin- 
cipally hemp,  iron,  and  timber,  from  the  Baltic;  and  grain,  hides,  and  skins,  from  Ireland. 
There  is  another  small  harbour  for  the  export  of  coal,  at  Saltcoats,  a  small  town  situated 
at  the  termination  of  a  ridge  of  steep  and  rocky  ground  in  the  vicinity  of  a  flat  sandy 
shore,  bordered  with  sand-hills.  It  is  much  frequented  as  a  watering  place  during  the 
summer  months,  and  enjoys  some  portion  of  the  coasting  trade.  Salt  is  manufactured 
here,  and  ship-building  is  carried  on  to  a  small  extent. 

In  this  part  of  the  country  there  are  eleven  strata  or  seams  of  coal,  which  dip  or  de- 
cline one  fathom  in  five  toward  the  sea,  from  south-west  to  south-east,  and  rise  toward  the 
land  in  a  contrary  direction.  These  seams  of  coal  were  originally  discovered  by  Robert 
Cunningham  of  Auchenharvie,  who,  by  the  death  of  his  uncle,  Sir  Robert  Cunningham, 
physician  to  Charles  II.,  became  proprietor  of  the  whole  parish.  He  made  trials,  at  great 
expense,  on  the  different  seams;  and  caused  shafts  or  pits  to  be  sunk  at  various  distances, 
to  ascertain  their  thickness,  their  qualities,  and  the  faults  or  obstructions  occurring  in  them. 
He  drove  a  level  under  his  own  and  part  of  Lord  Eglintoun's  estate,  and  thus  laid  dry  the 
upper  part  of  several  of  the  searns.  Being  then  enabled  to  procure  coal  in  much  greater  abun- 
dance, his  next  labour  was  to  facilitate  the  exportation  of  it  by  the  construction  of  a  har- 
bour at  Saltcoats,  in  which  undertaking  he  had  to  encounter  many  discouraging  obstacles, 
the  winter  storms  for  many  years  destroying  the  work  of  the  preceding  summer.  He 

VOL.  in.  c  completed 


10  VOYAGE    ROUND    GUF.AT    BRITAIN. 

completed  the  harbour  about  the  year  1700,  and  constructed  salt-pans  with  their  requisite 
appendages,  as  a  means  of  turning  to  profitable  account  the  refuse  of  the  coal.  By  these 
public-spirited  exertions  he  impaired  his  fortune,  anil  was  obliged  to  dispose  of  a  consi- 
derable part  of  his  estate,  reserving  the  tract  nearest  Saltcoats,  with  a  servitude  for  working 
coal  on  the  rest. 

The  prospect  of  the  Firth  and  its  islands  tended  to  relieve  the  monotony  of  the 
journey  along  this  extensive  bay ;  and  the  close  of  it  was  enlivened  by  an  object  of  the 
most  pleasing  interest.  This  was  the  newly  erected  PIER  AT  ARDROSSAN,  respecting 
which  Mr.  Tel  ford,  the  civil  engineer  who  planned  and  superintended  the  work,  has 
obligingly  communicated  some  particulars,  of  which  the  following  is  the  substance. 
Ardrossan  forms  the  northern  projecting  cape  of  the  bay  of  Ayr,  and  is  nearly  opposite 
the  excellent  roadstead  of  Lamlash  in  the  isle  of  Arran.  It  is  situated  in  the  estate  of 
the  Earl  of  Eglintoun,  who,  having  promoted  a  design  for  constructing  a  navigable  canal 
from  Glasgow  and  Paisley  through  the  manufacturing  districts  of  Johnston,  Beith,  and 
Dairy,  directed  Mr.  Tel  ford  to  fix  upon  the  most  eligible  situation  for  a  terminating  har- 
bour, lie  made  choice  of  this  prominent  point  of  Ardrossan.  It  is  protected  from  the 
greatest  exposure,  that  to  the  south-west,  by  an  extensive  ridge  of  rocks ;  and  a  small 
isle,  called  the  Horse  Isle,  secures  the  other  points.  It  has  an  ample  entrance  for  shipping 
as  large  as  West  liuliamen.  A  pier,  upwards  of  1000  yards  in  length,  has  already  been 
constructed,  within  the  outward  head  of  which  there  is  2i  feet  at  low  water.  Within  the 
protection  of  the  body  of  the  pier  a  capacious  graving  dock  has  been  constructed ;  also 
part  of  a  floating  dock,  in  which  it  is  intended  that  the  canal  barges  shall  come  along-side 
of  the  sea-vessels.  The  plan  embraces  sufficient  space  tor  ship-building  yards,  and  every 
necessary  accommodation  for  a  large  port.  By  the  liberal  and  unwearied  exertions  of  the 
Earl  of  Eglintoun  considerable  progress  has  been  made  with  a  new  town,  and  an  elegant 
inn  has  been  erected.  The  streets  adjacent  to  the  harbour  are  calculated  to  accommodate 
persons  engaged  in  business,  and  at  a  convenient  distance  villas  are  building  for  others  to 
whom  the  fine  sea-shore  and  extensive  baths  may  present  attractions  for  exercise  and  salu- 
brious recreation.  These  accommodations  have  not  been  prepared  in  vain,  the  place 
having  already  been  frequented  by  numerous  visitors  from  the  inland  country  :  during  the 
season,  its  pier,  like  that  of  Ramsgate,  forms  a  very  agreeable  and  animated  promenade. 
About  one  third  of  the  canal  is  already  completed  and  navigated.  Active  measures  arc 
now  carrying  on,  which  promise  the  speedy  completion  of  the  whole,  which  will  open  a 
.communication  in  the  course  of  one  day  from  Glasgow  and  Paisley  to  this  spacious  and 
commodious  harbour,  from  whence  vessels  can  depart  in  all  weathers  and  at  any  period 
of  the  tide. 

A  new  town  thus  erected  after  a  regular  plan,  on  the  site  of  an  obscure  village,  and 
combining  the  advantages  of  inland  and  maritime  navigation,  is  one  of  the  most  striking 
signs  of  modern  improvement.  There  is  something  too  of  a  substantial  and  imposing 

character 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  11 

character  in  edifices  of  stone,  the  material  here  employed,  which  we  cannot  associate  with 
structures  of  brick,  and  which  perhaps  pleases  the  more  because  it  assimilates  in  some 
degree  with  the  dignity  of  classic  architecture,  presenting,  in  its  fresh  and  nascent  state, 
the  image  of  a  colony  founded  by  the  ancients. 

About  two  miles  northward  of  Ardrossan  was  taken  the  DISTANT  VIEW  OF  THE 
ISLE  OF  ARRAN,  which  is  here  given.  Seen  from  this  point,  and  indeed  from  many 
others  along  the  adjacent  tract  of  country,  the  highland  scenery,  for  which  that  isle  is 
noted,  produces  a  most  impressive  and  picturesque  effect.  Groups  of  mountains,  among 
which  the  lofty  Coalfield,  less  known  by  its  native  and  more  poetical  name  Ben  Ghaoil, 
"  the  mountain  of  the  winds,"  is  conspicuous,  raise  their  craggy  peaks  above  the  cliffs  on 
the  shore  in  varied  continuity  of  outline,  with  rich  gradations  of  shade  and  colour,  forming 
a  bold  contrast  to  the  wide  expanse  of  waters  below  them.  The  coast  near  the  base  of 
Coalfield  is  indented  by  Brodick  Bay,  which,  with  its  castle,  is  celebrated  as  the  place 
where  Robert  Bruce  embarked  on  his  successful  expedition  for  the  deliverance  of  his 
country  and  the  recovery  of  his  crown,  an  enterprise  which  Mr.  Walter  Scott  has  comme- 
morated with  his  wonted  animation  and  felicity,  in  his  poem  called  the  "  Lord  of  the 
Isles."  Scenes  thus  signalized  by  Ihe  eveuls  of  past  ages  have  a  claim  on  the  notice  of 
the  beholder,  distincl  1'rom  that  which  nature  has  given  them;  and,  however  divested  of 
human  memorials,  they  seldom  fail  to  awaken  a  train  of  meditalion  in  which  the  memory 
and  Ihe  fancy  are  alike  engaged.  Scolland  is  eminenlly  rich  in  hislorical  vesliges  of  Ihis 
kind ;  and  Ihe  reverence  in  which  ihey  are  evidently  held  by  all  ranks  of  people  is  one  of 
the  finesl  Irails  in  the  national  character.  It  is  observable  lhat  many  places  in  the  district 
which  gave  birth  to  Wallace  are  designated  with  his  name ;  the  achievements  of  Bruce 
are,  as  it  were,  localized  with  equal  fidelity,  and  the  numerous  popular  legends  of  which 
these  and  other  great  men  are  Ihe  iheme  afford  so  many  proofs  of  Ihe  cordiality  wilh 
which  this  patriolic  feeling  is  cherished.  To  a  slranger  it  is  pleasing  to  be  thus  reminded 
that  he  is  travelling  in  an  ancient  country,  which,  in  its  present  aspecl,  affords  a  hope 
lhat  the  brightest  pages  of  its  history  have  yet  to  be  unfolded.  From  viewing  the  relics 
of  her  former  renown,  he  turns  to  contem plate  the  improvements  which  have  been  and 
are  now  laking  place  in  Ihe  condition  of  Scotland — the  enclosure  and  cultivation  of  vast 
tracls  of  land  ;  large  planlations ;  the  establishmenl  and  spread  of  manufaclures ;  Ihe 
growlh  of  commerce  indicaled  by  ihe  conslruclion  of  piers  and  harbours,  and  of  magni- 
ficent canals  branching  through  the  country  and  exlending  from  sea  to  sea.  These  im- 
provements are  rapid  and  general,  because  having  been  but  recently  adopted,  they  have 
comparatively  few  prejudices  lo  contend  with :  agriculture  and  the  useful  arts  have  been 
inlroduced  here  in  an  enlightened  age,  with  all  the  advantages  which  modern  science  has 
conferred  upon  them ;  and  in  the  hands  of  an  intelligent,  acute,  and  persevering  race  of 
men,  ihey  are  likely  soon  lo  be  carried  much  nearer  lo  perfeclion. 

The  Isle  of  Arran,  ancienlly  called  Air-Inn,  "  ihe  island  of  mountains,"  extends 

about 


12  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

about  thirty  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  is  somewhat  more  than  fourteen  miles  in  its 
greatest  breadth  from  east  to  west.  The  southern  part  is  somewhat  low,  presenting  a 
succession  of  round-backed  hills,  but  the  centre  and  north  of  the  island  well  accord  with 
the  name  by  which  it  is  characterised.  The  summits  of  the  principal  mountains  afford 
views  of  great  variety  and  extent ;  that  of  Goatfield  in  particular  commands  a  prospect 
extending  as  far  south  as  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  comprehending  the  three  kingdoms  at 
once.  Of  the  interior  there  will  be  occasion  to  speak  more  particularly,  as  it  is  compre- 
hended in  the  course  of  the  Voyage. 

Northward,  along  the  coast  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Ardrossan,  there  is  a  succes- 
sion of  very  pleasing  scenery,  which  is  not,  however,  of  a  nature  to  require  detailed  de- 
scription. Some  notice  is  due  to  Largs,  a  village  situated  on  a  beautiful  plain,  extending 
about  a  mile  from  the  shore  to  a  range  of  hills  which  form  an  agreeable  termination  to  the 
prospect.  On  this  plain  was  fought  the  celebrated  battle  of  Largs,  alluded  to  in  the  poem 
of  Hardiknute,  between  the  Scots  and  the  Danes  and  Norwegians,  in  1263,  during  the 
reign  of  Alexander  III.  There  are  a  number  of  cairns  and  other  remains  which  still  in- 
dicate the  scene  of  this  memorable  event. 

Many  of  the  inhabitants  are  employed  as  weavers  by  the  manufacturers  of  Paisley. 
There  is  an  annual  fair  held  at  midsummer  on  St.  Cosine's  day,  which,  in  former  times, 
when  the  intercourse  between  the  Highlands  and  Lowlands  was  far  less  frequent  and  re- 
gular, drew  together  a  great  assemblage  of  people  from  both  quarters.  They  met  for  the 
purpose  of  bartering  and  exchanging  their  respective  commodities,  and  of  laying  in  a  stock 
of  certain  articles  of  necessity  or  luxury  which  might  serve  them  throughout  the  year. 
The  fair  lasted  for  some  days,  and  presented  a  grotesque  and  singular  scene.  The  tents 
and  booths  of  the  traders,  and  of  persons  engaged  in  the  sale  of  refreshments,  &c.  formed 
a  kind  of  motley  suburb  to  the  town  ;  the  green  was  crowded  with  rustics  in  their  holiday 
dresses,  many  of  them  dancing  with  great  glee  to  the  strains  of  their  national  music,  or 
occupied  in  various  games  and  sports ;  and  the  beach  was  enlivened  by  a  great  concourse 
of  boats  from  the  adjacent  coast  and  the  neighbouring  islands,  which  gave  a  sort  of  comic 
importance  to  the  festival.  Owing  to  the  increase  of  trade  throughout  the  Highlands  this 
fair  has  fallen  off  considerably  of  late  years,  but  its  recurrence  is  still  hailed  by  the  people 
for  miles  round,  as  a  gratifying  relief  to  the  dulness  and  ennui  of  a  country  lite. 

Entering  Renfrewshire  near  the  village  of  Kelly,  and  crossing  the  breast  of  land 
which  is  bounded  by  the  point  of  Wemyss,  the  day's  journey  was  closed  by  a  delightful 
approach  to  ARDGOWAN,  the  seat  of  Sir  Michael  Stuart.  It  is  situated  on  an  eminence 
rising  gently  from  the  Firth  of  Clyde,  and  commanding  an  ever- varying  prospect  of  its 
navigation.  The  mansion  is  of  modern  date,  spacious,  noble,  and  elegant,  without  any 
undue  pretension  to  magnificence ;  it  is  exactly  the  kind  of  abode  which  a  man  of  rank 
and  opulence  should  choose  to  reside  in  ;  and  the  grounds  that  surround  it  are  laid  out  in 
the  same  good  taste  which  is  observable  in  its  construction. 


The  Isle  of  Arran,  taken  near  Ardrossan 


Ardgowan,  Renfrewshire 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  13 

Proceeding  along  the  Firth,  in  a  north-easterly  direction,  a  considerable  change  of 
scene  speedily  occurred.  The  throng  of  masts,  with  the  bustle  and  stir  occasioned  by 
the  arrival  and  departure  of  vessels,  indicated  the  approach  to  a  populous  and  busy  sea- 
port. The  VIEW  OF  GREENOCK  FROM  THE  CLYDE,  here  given,  comprehends  that 
town  and  harbour,  with  the  hills  that  bound  the  level  tract  of  land  on  which  they  are 
situated.  Near  the  base  of  those  hills  are  seen  some  elegant  houses  of  recent  erection, 
which  agreeably  denote  the  increasing  prosperity  of  the  place.  In  this  respect,  a  town 
subsisting  entirely  on  commerce  has  decidedly  the  advantage  over  one  whose  commerce 
arises  from  its  manufactures.  The  latter  must  necessarily  contain  a  large  proportion  of 
habitations  for  the  labouring  classes,  which  add  rather  to  its  extent  than  its  beauty,  while 
the  former  acquires  in  every  accession  to  its  magnitude  a  greater  degree  of  splendour  and 
elegance.  In  the  instance  of  Liverpool  and  Manchester,  not  to  mention  others,  this  dif- 
ference is  strikingly  apparent. 

The  trade  of  Greenock  was  originally  carried  on  by  the  Glasgow  merchants,  to  whom 
almost  all  the  vessels  of  this  port  belonged ;  but  the  inhabitants  gradually  became  pos- 
sessed of  capitals,  and  are  now  the  principal  ship-owners.  The  imports  consist  chiefly  of 
West  India  produce,  together  with  wine  and  grain ;  but  almost  every  article  of  foreign  growth 
or  fabric  finds  its  way  hither :  the  exports  are  the  goods  manufactured  in  the  populous 
country  bordering  on  the  Clyde.  The  town  of  Greenock,  together  with  the  adjacent 
village  of  Crawford's-dyke,  or  Car's-dyke,  may  be  about  a  mile  in  extent,  and  their  joint 
population  is  estimated  at  twenty  thousand  inhabitants.  The  principal  street  contains 
many  good  houses ;  the  best  are  the  new  buildings  at  the  two  extremities.  The  streets  to 
the  westward  are  spacious  and  regularly  built ;  it  is  here  that  the  wealthier  class  of  the  com- 
munity in  general  reside.  One  of  the  most  elegant  structures  is  the  New  Inn  or  Tontine, 
which  stands  eastward  of  the  space  formed  by  the  crossing  of  the  main  streets  in  the  centre 
of  the  town.  The  subscriptions  for  erecting  it  were  filled  up  in  the  course  of  two  days  to 
the  amount  of  ten  thousand  pounds,  a  circumstance  which  sufficiently  exemplifies  the 
opulence  as  well  as  the  public  spirit  of  the  place. 

In  the  streets  of  this  town  a  stranger  cannot  fail  to  be  surprised  by  the  frequency 
with  which  he  hears  the  Gaelic  tongue  spoken.  For  this  peculiarity  the  following  reasons 
have  been  assigned.  The  great  changes  which  have  been  taking  place  for  the  last  half 
century  in  the  Western  Highlands,  particularly  the  formation  of  large  farms  by  the  sup- 
pression of  small  ones,  have  induced  the  inhabitants  to  emigrate  in  considerable  numbers. 
Many  of  them  have  resorted  to  Greenock,  either  as  their  most  eligible  place  of  settlement, 
or  as  the  best  outlet  to  a  more  remote  emigration.  It  is  natural  that  they  should  retain 
with  fondness  their  native  idiom,  associated  as  it  is  with  all  their  recollections  of  family, 
of  kindred,  and  of  the  domestic  endearments  of  early  life.  It  serves  them  as  a  token  of 
cognizance  among  strangers  in  the  remotest  regions ;  it  is  in  effect  the  key-note  of  their 
sympathies ;  and  here,  on  the  threshold  of  their  mountain-home,  its  characteristic  forms  of 

VOL.  in.  D  expression 


14  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

expression  seem  perfectly  congenial  with  the  current  of  their  thoughts  and  feelings.  There 
is  something  impressive  in  the  reflection  that  the  language  of  the  ancient  Celts,  havin°- 
survived  the  vicissitudes  which  threatened  its  extinction,  should  be  preserved  among  their 
descendants  in  a  state  of  society  so  perfectly  different  from  that  in  which  it  originated, 
and  to  the  usages  of  which  it  seems  almost  exclusively  to  apply.  It  is  understood  and 
spoken,  not  only  by  the  lower  orders  in  this  flourishing  town,  but  also  by  some  of  its  most 
considerable  and  prosperous  citizens. 

The  outer  harbour  or  road  of  Greenock  is  confined  by  a  sandbank,  commencing  near 
T^umbarton,  and  terminating  a  little  below  the  town.  At  the  tail  of  this  bank  there  is 
spacious  and  good  anchorage  for  ships  of  any  burthen  that  navigate  the  Clyde.  The 
inner  harbour  contains  docks  for  the  accommodation  of  vessels  discharging  or  receiving 
cargoes ;  and  there  are  yards  for  ship-building,  which  is  carried  on  here  to  considerable 
extent.  Three  miles  further  up  the  Firth  is  situated  Port  Glasgow,  the  commerce  of 
which  is  similar  to  that  of  Greenock,  but  on  a  much  inferior  scale.  Several  improvements 
of  recent  date,  however,  attest  the  rising  importance  of  the  place;  extensive  warehouses 
have  been  erected  for  the  merchants ;  and  large  ponds  have  been  constructed  for  the  re- 
ception of  imported  timber. 

Respecting  the  improvement  of  the  port  of  Greenock,  and  the  progressive  increase  of 
its  trade,  some  details  are  given  in  Wilson's  Survey  of  Renfrewshire,  which  may  not  be 
deemed  uninteresting.  It  appears  that  there  has  been  a  great  increase  of  foreign  trade  at 
Greenock  since  the  commencement  of  the  present  century,  the  increase  being  near  50  per 
cent;  but  the  coasting  trade  at  this  port  has  declined  since  the  year  1800.  This,  how- 
ever, is  not  a  failure  of  any  part  of  the  coasting  trade  on  the  river  Clyde,  which,  upon  the 
whole,  has  greatly  increased,  but  merely  an  alteration  of  the  mode  of  carrying  on  the 
trade:  many  of  the  coasters,  in  consequence  of  the  improvements  on  the  river,  now  going 
direct  to  Glasgow,  instead  of  stopping  in  the  first  instance  at  Greenock.  This  shews  the 
beneficial  effects  of  the  works  carried  on  by  the  trustees  on  the  river  in  improving  the 
navigation.  Since  the  year  1797  they  have  expended  not  less  than  .£2700  per  annum  in 
these  improvements,  and  some  estimate  of  the  importance  of  their  operations,  and  of  the 
present  state  of  the  coasting  trade,  may  be  formed  from  the  following  facts.  In  1796  the 
total  number  of  vessels  which  came  up  to  the  bridge  of  Glasgow  was  1326;  of  which 
there  were,  Under  60  tons  .  .  1209  vessels, 

60  and  under  70  tons     .     .       117  vessels. 

Total  tonnage  55,980. 
Whereas  the  vessels  in  1806  were  in  number  1678,  and  consisted  of 

Under  60  tons      .     .     .     1228  vessels, 

60  and  under  80   ...       394 

80  and  under  100      ..         49 

100  and  upwards      .   \  7 

Total  tonnage  80,683  tons,  being  an  average  of  24,703  tons. 

A  farther 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  15 

A  farther  evidence  of  the  progressive  increase  of  the  trade  of  Greenock  may  be  drawn 
from  the  following  statements  of  the  amounts  of  customs  and  excise  duties  for  seven  years, 
from  1803  to  1810. 

Amount  of  the  duties  of  customs  received  at  the  port  of  Greenock  in  the  seven  years 
ending  5th  January,  1810. 

£          s.     d. 
Year  ending  5th  January,  J  804     .     .        208,490  12     Oi 

1805  ..        248,674  17     8 

1806  .     .       272,973    4    6i 

1807  .     .       369,433  10  111 

1808  .     .        355,095     9  lit 

1809  .     .       326,104  17     6i 

1810  .     .        489,275     3     SJ 


£  2,270,047  16    0* 

£         s.  d. 

Amount  of  excise  duties  from  5th  July,  1803,  to  5th  July,  1804     .     .       50,232  14  01 

1804  1805     .     .       53,113  12  8* 

1805  1806     .     .       87,400  12  11* 

1806  1807     •     .     194,428    6  3f 

1807  1808     .     .     206,636  16  H 

1808  1809     .     .     224,478     4  9f 

1809  1810     .     .     221,854  17  5 


£1,038,145     4 


It  may  be  added  that  the  revenue  arising  from  the  post  office  nearly  doubled  itself  in  the 
course  of  thirteen  years,  the  receipts  for  1797  being  .£2800,  and  in  1811  amounting  to 
£5300. 

The  state  of  the  docks  and  harbours  affords  another  evidence  of  the  great  prosperity 
of  the  town  of  Greenock.  In  the  year  1700  the  inhabitants  petitioned  the  parliament  of 
Scotland  for  a  fund  to  build  their  harbour,  but  the  petition  was  not  complied  with. 
However,  in  consequence  of  a  contract  with  Sir  John  Shaw,  their  superior,  and  a  volun- 
tary assessment,  the  harbour  was  begun  in  1707,  the  expense  of  which  amounted  to 
£5600,  a  great  debt  at  this  early  period  of  their  concerns.  After  this  the  commerce  of 
their  port  increased  so  rapidly,  that  in  the  year  1740  the  whole  debt  was  extinguished, 
and  there  remained  a  surplus  of  £1500.  In  consequence  of  an  act  of  parliament  in  1773, 
a  dry  dock  was  begun  in  1783,  and  further  improvements  continued  to  be  made  in  the 

D  2  harbour 


16  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

harbour  in  consequence  of  an  act  in  1789 ;  and  the  trade  still  advancing,  two  new  acts  of 
parliament  were  obtained  in  1801  and  1803,  for  building  new  piers,  quays,  warehouses, 
and  dry  docks  for  graving  and  repairing  vessels.  The  expenses  of  the  improvements  of 
the  harbour  were  estimated  by  Mr.  Rennie  at  .£51,567.  In  the  year  1810  the  powers  of 
the  several  acts  for  improving  the  town  and  harbour  of  Greenock  were,  in  consequence  of 
a  bill  brought  into  parliament,  altered  and  enlarged,  and  two  new  graving  or  dry  docks 
were  projected  at  the  east  quay,  which  were  estimated  by  Mr.  Rennie  at  .£36,455.  These 
improvements  have  greatly  augmented  the  revenue  arising  from  the  docks  and  harbours. 

The  nearness  of  this  port  to  the  western  entrance  of  the  Forth  and  Clyde  canal 
renders  it  an  important  depot,  from  whence  colonial  produce  may  be  easily  transported 
to  the  north  of  Europe.  The  merchants  of  Greenock,  although  aware  of  this  advantage, 
were  so  pressed  for  want  of  warehouses,  that  it  became  necessary  to  introduce  into  the 
acts  of  parliament  latterly  obtained,  for  the  improvement  of  the  town  and  harbour,  clauses 
empowering  the  magistrates  and  town-council,  as  trustees  or  commissioners,  to  erect 
warehouses  for  depositing  goods  and  merchandize  in  front  of  the  breast  of  the  new  har- 
bour. A  great  extent  of  these  buildings  has  been  already  executed  on  such  a  scale 
as  fully  to  accommodate  the  trade  and  give  superior  safety  to  the  interests  of  the 
revenue. 

Thus  Greenock,  in  the  course  of  little  more  than  a  century,  has  risen  from  the  con- 
dition of  an  obscure  fishing  village  to  that  of  an  opulent  and  thriving  port.  During  the 
same  period  the  manufactures  and  commerce  of  the  west  of  Scotland  have  been  improving 
with  correspondent  rapidity,  and  notwithstanding  occasional  checks  and  reverses,  they 
have  operated  a  most  important  and  beneficial  change  throughout  that  extensive  district. 
The  enterprising  spirit  of  the  people,  which  might  else  have  gradually  abated  and  died 
away,  or  influenced  by  the  warlike  bent  of  their  character  might  have  exhausted  itself  in 
fruitless  and  fatal  animosities,  has  taken  a  direction  calculated  to  ensure  their  permanent 
welfare.  The  vassalage  and  subserviency  of  the  feudal  system  have  become  obsolete,  the 
way  to  independence  has  been  thrown  open  to  all,  and  repeated  examples  of  extraordinary 
success  have  attracted  a  multitude  of  competitors  into  the  career  of  industry.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  gratifying  to  observe,  that  many  of  the  evils  that  might  have  been  ap- 
prehended as  the  necessary  consequences  of  such  a  change  have  been  avoided.  Com- 
mercial pursuits,  it  has  been  alleged,  have  a  tendency  to  deaden  the  moral  sensibility  of  a 
community,  to  supplant  every  liberal  principle  by  a  sordid  passion  for  gain,  and  to  bring 
into  contempt  every  occupation  which  has  not  gain  for  its  object.  In  many  manufactur- 
ing and  trading  towns  the  complaint  has  been,  that  the  vices  of  the  lower  orders  are  but 
too  often  connived  at,  from  a  notion  that  the  indulgence  of  those  vices  to  a  certain  extent 
is  sure  to  retain  them  in  a  state  of  subjection  and  laborious  dependence,  thus  diminishing 
the  number  of  competitors  for  wealth ;  while  among  the  richer  classes,  the  worth  of  a  man, 
in  every  sense  of  the  word,  is  estimated  generally  by  the  value  of  his  property  ;  and  the 

merit 


Greenock,  on  the  Clyde 


Steam  Boat  on  the  Clyde  near  Dumbarton 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  17 

merit  of  having  accumulated  a  fortune  is  considered  as  involving  every  other  sort  of 
merit.  But,  happily  for  Scotland,  there  exists  in  every  rank  of  society  a  strong  moral 
and  religious  feeling,  which  serves  to  counteract  the  evil  tendency  of  gainful  commerce ; 
and  the  blessings  of  education,  being  almost  gratuitously  diffused,  rescue  even  the  lowest 
orders  from  that  brutish  debasement  which  is  the  soil  of  all  the  vices.  No  where  are  in- 
tellectual attainments  more  highly  appreciated,  and  no  where  do  they  insure  greater  re- 
spect to  their  possessor.  Where  the  avenues  to  knowledge  are  so  numerous  and  so  easily 
accessible,  ignorance  is  sheer  disgrace ;  the  gifts  of  fortune  can  purchase  no  palliation  for 
it ;  hence  one  of  the  most  powerful  incentives  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth  is  the  leisure  it 
affords  for  the  enjoyments  of  literature  and  science,  and  a  successful  trader  feels  an 
honourable  pride  in  being  thought  worthy  of  associating  with  men  of  genius  or  learning. 
Where  such  motives  exist,  the  instances  of  that  narrow-minded  and  purse-proud  vulgarity, 
which  despises  what  it  can  neither  relish  nor  comprehend,  must  be  comparatively  rare. 
Almost  every  village  in  Scotland  has  its  book-society  and  its  library ;  similar  establishments 
are  encouraged  by  the  proprietors  of  extensive  manufactories ;  the  instruction  of  the  lower 
classes  is  an  object  of  public  concern,  and  they  are  freely  disposed  to  avail  themselves  of 
it,  from  a  conviction  that  it  may  be  a  means,  and  at  all  events  will  be  a  compensation  for 
affluence.  The  opulent  become  daily  more  emulous  in  their  zeal  for  improvement,  and 
among  the  mercantile  classes,  by  whom  the  extensive  commerce  of  the  Clyde  is  carried  on, 
it  would  not  be  difficult  to  adduce  numerous  examples  in  confirmation  of  that  spirited 
remark  once  made  by  Mr.  Fox,  that  abilities  for  business  are  perfectly  compatible  with 
fine  talents  and  a  taste  for  liberal  studies. 

Should  these  observations  be  considered  as  proceeding  from  a  desire  to  exhibit  the 
picture  in  its  most  favourable  point  of  view,  let  it  be  recollected  that  hope  is  a  more 
grateful  feeling  than  despondency,  and  that  there  has  been  of  late  too  evident  a  disposi- 
tion in  some  quarters  to  regard  the  evils  of  commerce  as  inherent  in  its  nature  and  alto- 
gether irreparable.  But  it  is  high  time  to  terminate  this  digression  and  recur  to  the 
narrative.  In  proceeding  from  Greenock  up  to  Dumbarton,  which  indeed  is  beyond  the 
limits  of  a  coasting  voyage,  a  conveyance  offered  itself  which  forms  a  very  striking  pecu- 
liarity in  the  navigation  of  the  Clyde.  This  was  the  steam-boat,  of  which  a  sufficient 
number  have  been  established  to  maintain  a  constant  intercourse  between  Glasgow  and 
Greenock.  They  can  depart  during  any  period  of  the  tide  and  in  all  winds,  and  per- 
form the  voyage  generally  in  three  hours  or  three  hours  and  a  half.  An  idea  may  be 
formed  of  these  vessels  by  reference  to  the  VIEW  OF  STEAM-BOATS  ON  THE  CLYDE, 
NEAR  DUMBARTON.  It  is  observable  that  the  smoke  of  the  engine  is  carried  off  by  a 
tall  cast-iron  chimney,  bearing  the  semblance  of  a  mast,  and  sometimes  serving  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  one  when  the  state  of  the  wind  will  allow  a  sail  to  be  hoisted  with  advantage. 
The  stream  of  smoke  from  the  orifice  generally  takes  a  horizontal  direction,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  movement  of  the  vessel,  forming  a  pendant  of  extraordinary  length  and 

very 


18  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

very  singular  appearance.  By  this  signal  the  people  can  distinguish  the  steam-boats  at 
a  very  great  distance.  They  are  fitted  up  in  a  style  similar  to  that  of  the  packet-boats  on 
navigable  canals.  The  principal  cabin  for  passengers  is  furnished  with  draught  and  chess 
boards,  back-gammon  tables,  and  other  implements  of  pastime,  as  well  as  with  a  small 
library  of  that  description  of  books  denominated  light  reading;  on  the  roof  there  are 
chairs  and  benches  for  the  convenience  of  those  who,  in  fine  weather,  choose  to  enjoy  the 
delightful  prospects  that  present  themselves  on  both  shores  of  the  Clyde.  The  space 
before  the  mast,  or  near  the  steam  engine,  answering  to  what  is  called  the  steerage  pass- 
age, is  allotted  at  half-price  to  those  who  can  put  up  with  inferior  accommodations  for  the 
sake  of  travelling  at  a  very  cheap  rate.  The  steam-boat  takes  in  and  lands  passengers  at 
Dumbarton  and  Port  Glasgow,  and  the  mechanism  of  her  motion  is  such  as  to  allow  her 
to  touch  at  those  places  with  the  least  possible  delay,  and  to  lie  to  or  resume  her  course 
with  equal  promptitude.  Her  rate  of  moving  is  delightfully  uniform  and  rapid  ;  and  it  is 
particularly  amusing  to  observe  with  what  ease  she  will  outstrip  a  vessel  though  under  full 
sail. 

About  the  period  here  alluded  to  there  were  six  steam-packets  plying  on  the  river, 
two  of  which  carried  goods  as  well  as  passengers.  Larger  boats  with  more  powerful 
engines  were  then  constructing;  among  others,  one  of  about  100  feet  keel  and  17  feet 
beam,  with  an  engine  of  24  horses  power,  and  one  of  equal  burthen,  having  an  engine  of 
30  horses  power.  The  vessels  in  starting  take  advantage  of  the  tide  as  far  as  circum- 
stances will  permit ;  but  as  they  depart  at  different  hours  from  the  same  place,  they  are 
obliged  sometimes  to  go  part  or  nearly  the  whole  of  their  course  against  the  tide.  Against 
a  moderate  breeze  of  contrary  wind,  with  the  tide  favourable,  the  voyage  has  been  per- 
formed in  two  hours  and  a  quarter.  The  mail-coach  between  Glasgow  and  Greenock 
was  allowed  three  hours  and  a  half,  and  though,  by  extraordinary  exertion,  some  of  the 
coaches  were  made  to  run  that  distance  in  an  hour  less  time,  yet  a  decided  preference  was 
soon  given  to  the  steam-boats,  on  account  of  the  facility  and  cheapness  of  the  convey- 
ance. One  of  them  has  been  known  to  carry  two  hundred  and  forty-seven  persons  at  a 
time;  and  in  fine  summer  weather  from  five  to  six  hundred  have  gone  from  Glasgow  to 
Port  Glasgow  and  Greenock  and  returned  the  same  day.  The  easy  passage,  and  the  fine 
scenery  which  it  commands,  have  induced  many  persons  to  make  this  a  mere  excursion  of 
pleasure ;  and  the  bathing  places  below  Greenock,  furnishing  an  unexceptionable  apology 
for  a  trip  of  this  kind,  are  beginning  to  be  very  much  frequented.  The  first  steam-boats 
that  succeeded  in  Scotland  were  planned  by  Mr.  Bell  of  Helensburgh,  and  built  by  Messrs. 
John  Wood  and  Co.  of  Port  Glasgow. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  objects  in  the  course  of  the  voyage  is  the  rock  of  Dum- 
barton with  its  castle,  included  in  the  view  above  referred  to.  The  spreading  volume  of 
smoke  which  appears  to  proceed  from  the  verge  of  the  shore,  arises  from  a  manufactory  of 
bottle  and  crown  glass,  situated  near  the  town,  which  stands  on  a  peninsula  formed  by 

the 


VOYAGE    UOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  19 

the  winding  of  the  Leven  at  its  junction  with  the  Clyde.  The  rock  is  divided  by  a  fissure 
about  mid-way,  and  has  two  summits ;  on  the  lower  are  several  batteries  mounted  with 
cannon.  The  higher  and  narrower  summit  commands  very  extensive  views :  toward  the 
north  is  seen  Loch  Lomond  and  -the  rugged  mountains  in  its  neighbourhood,  the  most 
conspicuous  of  which  is  the  lofty  Ben  Lomond.  Between  the  loch  and  the  Clyde  extends 
the  rich  vale  of  Leven  with  its  meandering  river.  The  prospect  down  the  Firth  includes 
the  towns  of  Port  Glasgow  and  Greenock,  and  is  terminated  on  the  right  by  a  majestic 
range  of  mountains,  more  picturesque  in  form  and  outline  than  perhaps  any  other  estuary 
in  the  island  can  boast.  In  clear  weather,  the  view  eastward  extends  beyond  the  city  of 
Glasgow. 

Dumbarton  castle  was  long  deemed  impregnable,  but  was  taken  by  escalade,  in  1571, 
when  held  by  Lord  Fleeming  for  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots.  This  arduous  enterprise  was 
suggested  by  a  common  soldier  named  Ramsay,  who  had  served  in  the  fortress,  and  in 
consequence  of  a  pique  deserted  to  the  opposite  party.  When  the  assailants,  under  his 
guidance,  and  commanded  by  a  captain  of  the  name  of  Crawford,  had  proceeded  midway 
in  their  ascent,  an  accident  occurred  which  placed  them  in  the  most  imminent  danger. 
One  of  their  comrades  was  seized  with  a  sudden  fit,  and  clung,  apparently  lifeless,  to  the 
ladder.  To  pass  him  was  impossible,  to  tumble  him  down  the  rock  would  be  cruel,  and 
by  alarming  the  guard  might  occasion  a  discovery.  In  this  emergency,  Captain  Crawford, 
with  admirable  presence  of  mind,  directed  that  the  soldier  should  be  tied  fast  in  his  posi- 
tion, that  he  might  not  fall  when  the  fit  was  over,  and  then  gave  orders  that  the  ladder 
should  be  turned  with  that  side  toward  the  rock,  which  being  done,  the  soldiers  mounted 
on  the  other  side  without  difficulty.  The  place  was  then  carried  in  a  most  daring  and 
determined  manner;  the  governor  sliding  down  a  part  of  the  rock  escaped  through  a  by- 
path, and  fled  into  Argyleshire. 

The  rock  of  Dumbarton  is  of  the  basaltic  kind,  and  some  parts  of  it  have  been  ob- 
served to  be  strongly  magnetic,  occasioning  a  considerable  variation  when  a  compass  is 
brought  near  it.  The  late  professor  Anderson,  of  Glasgow,  made  several  experiments  to 
verify  this  interesting  fact,  and  marked  with  paint  those  parts  of  the  rock  which  possess 
magnetism,  with  the  direction  of  the  poles.  Another  peculiarity  that  has  been  noticed 
concerning  this  rock  is,  that  the  true  Scottish  thistle,  a  rare  plant,  having  its  light  leaves 
variegated  with  white,  grows  in  considerable  quantities  about  its  base,  and,  sparingly, 
even  on  its  summit.  This  distinguished  symbol  of  the  national  renown  might  seem,  to  an 
enthusiastic  fancy,  to  delight  in  thus  adorning  one  of  the  ancient  strong-holds  of  the 
country. 

The  voyage  down  the  Firth  was  exceedingly  pleasant,  presenting  on  either  hand  a  rich 
diversity  of  prospect,  and  enlivened  by  a  multitude  of  vessels  sailing  in  different  directions. 
On  a  point  of  land,  near  what  may  be  called  the  elbow  of  the  Clyde,  as  it  there  turns 
from  a  westerly  to  a  southerly  course,  stands  the  Clough  light-house,  which,  together  with 

that 


20  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

that  established  on  Toward  Point,  lower  down  on  the  opposite  shore  of  Cowal,  is  of 
essential  service  to  the  navigation  of  this  confined  and  winding  channel. 

On  arriving  at  Ardgowan,  its  hospitable  owner  had  the  politeness  to  provide  a  boat 
for  the  purpose  of  crossing  over  to  Rothsay,  in  the  isle  of  Bute.  This  town  is  situated  at 
the  extremity  of  a  bay,  in  which  there  is  safe  anchorage.  There  are  some  remains  of  an 
ancient  castle,  in  which  are  still  pointed  out  the  bed-chambers  and  banqueting-rooms  of 
Robert  II.  and  Robert  III.,  the  last  Scottish  monarchs  who  inhabited  this  ancient  struc- 
ture. In  succeeding  times  it  was  the  principal  residence  of  the  Stuarts,  ancestors  of  the 
present  family  of  Bute,  and  continued  in  their  possession  until  it  was  burnt  by  the  Duke 
of  Argyle  during  the  troubles  of  1685.  Rothsay  gives  the  title  of  duke  to  the  heir  ap- 
parent of  the  British  crown.  Being  a  royal  borough,  it  sends,  in  conjunction  with  Ayr, 
Inverary,  and  Campbeltown,  one  representative  to  parliament.  The  principal  pursuit  of 
the  inhabitants  is  the  herring  fishery ;  the  cotton  manufacture  has  also  been  introduced, 
and  occupies  a  considerable  number  of  hands. 

This  island,  together  with  that  of  Arran,  and  the  isles  of  Great  and  Little  Cumbrae 
and  Inchmarnoch,  constitutes  the  county  of  Bute.  It  is  separated  from  the  district  of 
Cowal,  in  Argyleshire,  by  a  long  and  very  narrow  channel.  The  extent  of  the  isle  of 
Bute,  from  north  to  south,  is  about  eighteen  miles ;  its  greatest  breadth,  from  east  to  west, 
is  about  five  miles,  but  its  area  is  indented  by  several  deep  bays.  The  northern  parts  are 
rocky  and  barren;  the  more  fertile  tracts  lie  to  the  southward,  and  those  which  are  under 
cultivation  produce  abundance  of  barley,  oats,  and  potatoes.  The  soil  is  considered  by  a 
agriculturists  as  capable  of  being  turned  to  the  highest  account  of  any  in  all  the  Hebrides. 
The  union  of  two  incongruous  employments,  farming  and  fishing,  tended  to  retard  the 
improvement  of  these  advantages.  When  the  late  Earl  of  Bute  came  to  his  estate  he 
took  measures  to  establish  a  distinction  between  them,  so  that  each  individual,  according 
to  his  choice,  might  devote  his  sole  attention  either  to  one  or  the  other;  in  consequence 
of  which  arrangement,  and  the  encouragement  that  his  lordship  gave  to  agriculture,  the 
island  soon  assumed  a  more  flourishing  aspect. 

Much  lime  is  calcined  here,  both  for  private  use  and  for  exportation.  Great  quan- 
tities of  slate  are  also  found.  The  populous  districts  of  the  west  of  Scotland  afford  a  ready 
market  for  these  and  other  products  of  the  island.  There  are  regular  packets  from  Roth- 
say, and  a  ferry-boat  once  a  week  from  Scoulay  to  the  Largs. 

In  coasting  southward  from  Rothsay,  the  view  here  given  of  MOUNT  STUART,  THE 
SEAT  OF  THE  MARQUIS  OF  BUTE,  was  taken,  at  such  a  distance  from  the  shore  as  to 
comprise,  within  the  angle  of  vision,  the  remote  mountains  of  Arran,  whose  high  and 
rugged  peaks  form  a  remarkable  contrast  with  the  level  ground  on  this  part  of  the  inter- 
vening island.  The  mansion  is  agreeably  situated  on  an  eminence,  sufficiently  elevated 
to  command  some  extensive  prospects  over  the  Firth  of  Clyde :  its  spacious  grounds  are 
finely  interspersed  with  wood,  which,  in  a  quarter  so  exposed  to  the  sea,  produces  a  most 
agreeable  effect. 


Mount  Stuart,  Isle  of  Bute 


Loch  Ranza,  Isle  of  Arran 


VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  21 

The  day's  excursion  terminated  at  LOCH  RANZA,  a  fine  harbour,  of  which  a  view  is 
here  given.  It  is  situated  on  the  north-western  extremity  of  the  isle  of  Arran.  There 
existed  no  motive  for  proceeding  to  the  peninsula  and  Mull  of  Cantyre,  as  the  whole  of 
that  tract  is  of  an  unvaried  character,  and  peculiarly  barren  of  subjects  for  delineation. 
One  part  of  it  indeed,  the  isthmus  formed  by  the  western  and  eastern  Loch  of  Tarbat,  and 
connecting  South  Knapdale  with  Cantyre,  might  have  gratified  curiosity,  and  deserves 
to  be  briefly  mentioned.  Across  this  isthmus  of  little  more  than  a  mile  vessels  used 
formerly  to  be  drawn  by  horses,  to  avoid  the  perils  attending  the  tedious  circumnaviga- 
tion of  the  promontory.  The  term  Tarbat,  which  is  applied  to  many  isthmuses  in  North 
Britain,  is  by  some  derived  from  two  Gaelic  words*  signifying  the  drawing  of  boats. 
This  isthmus  might  be  called,  as  Pennant  observes,  the  Tarbat,  by  way  of  pre-eminence, 
from  a  singular  circumstance  related  by  Torfaeus.  When  Magnus  the  Barefooted,  king 
of  Norway,  obtained,  from  Donald-Bane  of  Scotland,  the  cession  of  the  Western  Isles,  or 
all  those  places  that  could  be  surrounded  in  a  boat,  he  added  to  them  the  peninsula  of 
Cantyre  by  this  fraud  :  he  placed  himself  in  a  boat,  held  the  rudder,  was  drawn  over  this 
narrow  tract,  and  by  this  species  of  navigation  wrested  the  country  from  his  brother 
monarch.  Robert  Bruce  made  this  passage  in  the  course  of  his  expedition,  and  the 
incident  is  most  happily  introduced  by  Mr.  Walter  Scott,  in  his  poem  of  the  "  Lord  of 
the  Isles,"  in  his  spirited  description  of  the  monarch's  voyage  from  Skye.  In  the  close  of 
that  description  the  poet,  with  his  usual  facility,  and  as  it  were  by  a  single  glimpse,  places 
a  magnificent  scene  before  the  imagination  of  his  readers : 

"  Now  launch'd  once  more,  the  inland  sea 
They  furrow  with  fair  augury, 

And  steer  for  A  rran's  isle ; 
The  sun,  ere  yet  he  sunk  behind 
Ben-ghoil,  '  the  mountain  of  the  wind,' 
Gave  his  grim  peaks  a  greeting  kind, 

And  bade  Loch  Ranza  smile." 

The  bay  extends  about  a  mile  inland ;  its  castle,  which  though  now  in  ruins,  gives  an  air 
of  venerable  importance  to  the  place,  is  situated  on  a  low  projecting  neck  of  land,  that 
forms  an  inner  harbour  with  a  narrow  passage,  but  of  considerable  depth.  On  a  small 
plain  beyond,  which  is  watered  by  a  stream,  is  situated  a  village ;  the  distant  view  com- 
prehends a  rugged  amphitheatre  of  the  mountains  of  Arran,  which  have  nowhere  a  more 
imposing  and  picturesque  effect  on  the  view  than  from  this  bay.  The  castle  is  of  con- 
siderable antiquity,  for  it  is  mentioned  by  Fordun,  who  wrote  about  the  year  1380,  as  a 
royal  castle.  If  tradition  may  be  cited,  the  whole  island  was,  at  a  very  early  period,  the 
favourite  abode  of  mighty  men.  Fingal,  the  father  of  Ossian,  is  said  to  have  resided  here 
occasionally  for  the  sake  of  hunting ;  and  some  of  the  caves  on  the  coast  are  pointed  out 
as  the  retreats  where  he  and  his  vassals  seethed  their  venison.  Its  reputation  as  a  royal 
VOL.  in.  E  chase 


22  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN". 

chase  was  long  maintained ;  and  when  the  Bruce  sounded  his  bugle  after  landing  in  Loch 
Ranza,  his  faithful  adherents,  Douglas,  Lennox,  and  Delahaye,  were  summoned  from 
their  sport  by  the  welcome  signal. 

The  race  of  hunters  and  warriors  have  now  disappeared,  and  their  hardy  pursuits 
have  given  place  to  humbler  occupations.  The  islanders  of  Arran  in  general  employ  them- 
selves in  tillage  and  fishing ;  at  those  times  of  the  year  when  the  herring-shoals  appear  in 
these  seas,  Loch  Ranza  is  frequented  by  numerous  vessels,  of  various  form  and  con- 
struction, engaged  in  the  fishery,  which  present  a  very  animated  and  cheerful  scene. 

On  the  next  morning  a  favourable  breeze  served  from  Loch  Ranza,  and  enabled  the 
vessel  to  reach  the  eastern  outlet  of  the  Crinan  canal  in  the  course  of  the  day.  The 
whole  coast  of  the  peninsula  from  Skipnish  to  Loch  Gilp  Head,  near  that  outlet,  is  of 
moderate  height,  and  exhibits  few  signs  of  cultivation.  Having  landed,  it  was  necessary 
to  proceed  on  foot  along  the  bank  of  the  canal  to  the  north-west  end :  the  walk  was 
extremely  pleasant  and  agreeable.  After  crossing  the  ferry  at  Loch  Crinan,  the  day's 
journey  terminated  at  DUNTRUNE  CASTLE,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given.  It  is  the 
property  of  Neill  Malcolm,  Esq.  to  whom  it  has  descended  through  a  long  line  of  ancestry. 
His  father  made  some  improvements,  which  have  certainly  rendered  it  a  very  comfortable 
residence.  The  castle  stands  on  a  rock  of  small  elevation,  the  base  of  which  is  washed  on. 
one  side  by  the  sea.  The  scenery  around  it,  and  most  of  the  views  which  it  commands, 
are  rather  of  a  mild  character,  and  have  little  of  the  ruggedness  of  either  the  Hebridean 
or  the  Highland  landscape. 

Of  so  important  a  public  work  as  the  Crinan  canal  something  more  than  a  mere 
cursory  notice  will  doubtless  be  expected  ;  and  it  is  with  great  satisfaction  that  the  follow- 
ing particulars,  obtained  through  an  application  to  that  eminent  and  experienced  civil 
engineer,  Mr.  Rennie,  are  presented  to  the  reader.  For  the  urbanity  and  promptness 
with  which  that  application  was  complied  with  the  warmest  acknowledgments  are  due. 

The  Crinan  canal  commences  at  Loch  Gilp,  a  branch  of  Loch  Fyne,  at  Ardrishaig, 
and  runs  on  the  western  side  of  the  loch  to  near  Oakfield,  a  distance  of  about  two  miles, 
from  thence  to  Cairnbaan,  a  distance  of  about  two  miles  more,  where  it  crosses  the  road 
leading  from  Inverary  through  Loch  Gilp  Head  to  Bellanoch,  and  to  the  ferry  across  the 
sound  of  Jura  to  the  islands  of  Jura  and  Ila. 

From  Cairnbaan  the  canal  runs  along  the  eastern  side  of  the  road  to  Bellanoch,  a 
distance  of  about  three  miles  more ;  from  thence,  under  the  high  cliffs  of  rock  on  the 
western  side  of  Loch  Crinan,  cutting  through  the  skirts  of  the  rocks,  in  some  parts,  at  the 
depth  of  from  40  to  50  feet,  till  it  comes  to  Portree,  where  it  enters  into  the  bay  of  Criiian 
on  its  western  side,  a  farther  distance  of  about  two  miles  from  Bellanoch,  making  the 
whole  length  nine  miles,  from  Loch  Gilp  to  Loch  Crinan. 

At  the  entrance  of  the  canal  from  Loch  Gilp  there  is  an  extensive  stone  pier  to 
protect  vessels  either  entering  or  coming  out  of  the  sea-lock  from  the  southerly  winds, 

which, 


Duntrune  Castle,  Loch  Creran,  Argylshire 


Loch  Swene,  Argylshire 


VOYAGE    KOL'XD    GRKAT    BRITAIN.  23 

which,  when  blowing  hard,  send  a  heavy  sea  up  Loch  Fyne  and  into  Loch  Gilp :  within 
the  sea-lock  there  is  a  commodious  basin  for  vessels  to  remain  in.  From  the  basin  there 
are  three  locks  within  a  short  distance,  rising,  with  the  rise  of  the  sea-lock,  about  26  feet. 
The  canal  then  runs  on  the  same  leVel  to  Cairnbaan,  where  there  are  four  locks  rising  into 
the  summit-level  about  35  feet.  The  summit-level  runs  to  Dell,  a  distance  of  little  more 
than  half  a  mile,  where  there  are  five  locks  in  a  short  distance,  the  last  at  Dunarary, 
locking  down  together  about  45  feet.  From  Dunarary  the  canal  runs  on  the  same  level 
to  Portree,  where  there  is  a  lock  into  the  basin  of  about  10  feet  fall.  From  this  basin, 
which  is  not  so  extensive  as  the  one  at  Ardrishaig,  there  is  a  sea-lock  into  Loch  Crinan, 
falling  about  seven  feet.  This  lock  stands  in  deep  water;  the  entrance  is  well  sheltered 
by  nature,  and  needs  no  pier  for  its  protection.  The  length  of  the  locks  between  the 
gates  is  96  feet,  the  width  24  feet,  and  the  depth  of  water  in  the  canal  12  feet. 

The  locks  on  the  high  ground  on  the  western  side  of  the  canal  supply  it  with 
water.  In  heavy  rains  an  abundance  is  there  collected  by  means  of  dams  made  across 
the  neck  or  outlet,  with  sluices  for  draining  off  the  water  when  required  for  supplying  the 
canal.  The  general  line  of  the  canal  runs  from  south-east  to  north-west,  but  its  direction 
is  usually  termed  east  and  west.  It  is  for  the  greatest  part  cut  through  rock ;  in  many 
places  to  a  great  depth,  and  at  enormous  cost.  The  whole  expenses  have  amounted  to 
about  <£  140,000. 

The  great  accommodation  which  this  canal  affords  consists  in  passing  vessels  from 
Loch  Gilp  to  Loch  Crinan,  by  which  they  avoid  the  long  and  dangerous  navigation  round 
the  Mull  of  Cantyre,  and  save  in  distance,  from  the  Clyde  to  the  bay  of  Crinan,  upwards 
of  60  miles.  It  also  affords  a  short  and  safe  passage  for  small  boats  to  and  from  the 
fisheries  of  cod,  ling,  and  herring,  on  the  western  coast,  which  could  not  with  safety 
navigate  round  the  Mull  of  Cantyre.  These  boats  formerly  used  to  unload  in  West  Loch 
Tarbat,  and  they,  as  well  as  their  cargoes,  were  carried  over  the  isthmus  into  East  Loch 
Tarbat,  on  Loch  Fin,  about  twelve  miles  south  of  the  entrance  into  the  Crinan  canal. 

The  number  of  these  boats  and  of  small  vessels  under  12  tons  burden,  passing  the 
canal  in  the  course  of  a  year,  was  about  600 ;  and  about  700  vessels  from  12  to  120  tons, 
with  various  cargoes.  The  number  of  vessels  to  and  from  the  herring  fisheries  on  the 
western  coast,  in  moderate  seasons,  was  about  700  annually.  These  were  taken  on  an 
average  of  the  years  1809  and  1810 ;  but  the  tonnage  dues  being  very  low,  did  not  amount 
to  more  than  about  <£l650  on  the  average,  per  annum. 

The  depth  of  water,  in  spring  tides,  at  Loch  Gilp,  is  15  feet;  and  at  the  Crinan  end, 
in  ordinary  tides,  18  feet.  It  is  to  be  observed,  in  reference  to  ordinary  tides,  that  the 
tides  here  are  so  much  influenced  by  the  winds  and  currents  among  the  islands  north  of 
Loch  Crinan,  that  they  have  no  regularity.  Instances  have  been  known  Avhen  what  should 
have  been  a  spring  tide  has  risen  only  two  feet,  while  a  neap  tide  has  risen  10  feet. 

The 


24  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BKITAIN. 

The  execution  of  the  Crinan  canal  was  a  work  of  no  small  difficulty.  In  some 
places  it  is  carried  through  a  deep  morass,  in  others  through  rock ;  and  the  torrents  which 
come  from  the  hills  on  the  west  side  of  the  vale  through  which  it  runs  bring  down  gravel 
and  stones  in  such  quantities  as  to  choke  up  the  culverts  made  for  passing  them  under 
the  canal,  and  hence  the  water  rises  until  it  overflows  the  banks,  and  at  times  occasions 
much  injury. 

To  resume  the  narrative. — A  ride  over  a  wild  and  hilly  tract  conducted  to  Polthalic, 
where,  from  a  high  hill  that  overlooks  a  large  uninhabited  house  belonging  to  Mr.  Malcolm, 
a  very  extensive  prospect  opens  north  and  south.  The  elevation  is  such  as  to  enable  the 
spectator  to  look  down,  as  on  a  map,  over  a  large  group  of  rocks  and  islands.  The  Paps 
of  Jura,  and  part  of  the  more  distant  isle  of  Ila,  were  visible.  The  Gulf  of  Corrievrekan, 
which  separates  Jura  from  Scarba,  and  the  mountains  of  Mull,  were  very  distinctly  seen. 
As  that  gulf  forms  the  communication  between  the  Atlantic  and  the  internal  sea  of 
Argyleshire,  it  is  agitated,  at  the  flowing  and  ebbing  of  the  tide,  in  a  most  tremendous 
manner.  The  rushing  and  rebounding  of  immense  bodies  of  water  form  a  whirlpool  which 
is  heard  at  a  great  distance,  and  seems  to  threaten  immediate  destruction  to  such  boats 
as  approach  it.  Large  vessels,  it  is  said,  may  pass  through  when  the  conflict  of  waters 
is  at  its  height,  but  the  navigation  of  such  a  raging  gulf  must  always  be  attended  with 
danger. 

On  descending  to  the  shore  of  Loch  Craignish  a  ferry-boat  was  at  hand,  which  saved 
a  ride  of  ten  miles  round  the  shores  of  the  loch  to  Craignish  castle,  which  belongs  to 
Archibald  Campbell,  Esq.  laird  of  Jura.  It  has  not  much  the  appearance  of  a  castle,  but 
rather  resembles  a  high  dwelling-house  with  a  steep-pitched  roof;  and  the  incongruous 
addition  of  sash-windows  still  further  detracts  from  its  dignity  as  a  fortress.  Its  situation, 
at  the  entrance  of  a  bay,  like  that  of  most  others  on  these  shores,  seems  to  indicate  that 
the  original  intention  of  its  founders  was  to  defend  their  territories  from  the  incursions  of 
a  maritime  foe.  After  a  short  stay  at  this  place,  the  return  to  Duntrune  Avas  accomplished 
in  a  row  of  two  hours,  with  an  ebb  tide. 

In  the  course  of  a  subsequent  journey  to  Castle  Swene,  a  ruin  about  fifteen  miles  from 
Duntrune,  the  view  here  given  of  LOCH  SWENE  was  taken  from  a  position  near  the  head  of 
the  loch.  Its  shores  are  rocky  and  irregular,  producing,  by  their  confused  and  intricate 
sinuosities;  an  effect  strikingly  picturesque.  The  various  creeks,  inlets,  and  craggy  pro- 
jections, that  presented  themselves  on  passing  along,  afforded  many  combinations  of  wild 
and  rugged  scenery,  that  might  well  deserve  to  be  studied  in  detail.  Castle  Swene,  by  its 
truly  antique  character,  as  well  as  by  its  position,  harmonizes  well  with  the  general  features 
of  the  landscape.  Little  doubt  seems  to  be  entertained  that  it  is  of  Danish  or  Norwegian 
origin  ;  but  few  particulars  are  recorded  respecting  either  its  foundation  or  its  subsequent 
history. 


Rassella,  near  Kilmartin,  Loch  Creaan,  Argylshire 


On  the  Isle  of  Jura 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  25 

These  and  other  excursions  on  this  part  of  the  coast,  it  will  be  perceived,  commence 
and  terminate  at  Duntrune  Castle.  Its  hospitable  owner,  Mr.  Malcolm,  who  was  at  this 
period  absent,  had  the  politeness  to  direct  that  the  traveller  should  be  made  as  much  at 
home  as  possible ;  and  it  is  gratifying  to  acknowledge,  that  the  attentions  of  his  factor, 
Mr.  John  Campbell,  rendered  this  home  in  every  respect  a  most  agreeable  one. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  castle,  between  Loch  Crinan  and  Kilmartin,  there  is  a  valley 
of  no  inconsiderable  extent,  containing  many  huge  upright  stones  and  cairns.  About  a 
mile  and  a  half  from  the  head  of  Loch  Crinan  there  is  a  Druidical  circle,  about  thirty 
feet  in  diameter,  the  stones  of  which  are  in  sand,  though  the  ground  that  surrounds  the 
circle  is,  to  a  considerable  distance,  bog  earth.  The  accompanying  view,  entitled 
RASSELLA,  NEAR  KILMARTIN,  will  serve  to  afford  an  idea  of  its  character  and  situation. 
The  hillock  in  the  second  ground,  is  a  cairn  consisting  of  grey  stones,  a  relic  assignable, 
according  to  most  antiquaries,  to  the  age  of  the  Druids.  Objects  of  this  kind  do  not, 
strictly  speaking,  come  within  the  scope  of  this  work ;  but  in  the  present  instance,  when 
they  occur  so  near  the  coast,  the  introduction  of  them  may  be  allowed,  as  affording 
evidence  of  the  character  of  its  primitive  inhabitants.  It  has  been  of  late  conjectured 
that  the  Druids  had  two  kinds  of  circles,  religious  and  judicial ;  the  one  appropriated  to 
the  celebration  of  their  mystic  rites,  and  the  other  to  the  administration  of  justice.  The 
circle  in  question  seems  to  have  been  of  the  former  class,  if  we  may  judge  from  the 
proximity  of  the  sepulchral  relic  just  mentioned  ;  but  be  that  as  it  may,  its  presence  alone 
shews  that  this  district  was  peopled  by  a  fraternity  of  those  idolatrous  hierarchs,  who 
assumed  absolute  sway  over  the  souls  and  bodies  of  their  fellow-creatures. 

The  next  object  of  investigation  was  the  isle  of  Jura,  one  of  the  most  rugged  of  the 
Hebrides,  extending  about  thirty  miles,  from  the  Gulf  of  Corrievrekan  northward,  to  the 
sound  of  Ila,  which  bounds  it  on  the  south-west.  Its  general  breadth  is  from  six  to  seven 
miles  ;  it  is  in  one  part  deeply  indented  by  a  bay  which  occasions  an  isthmus,  denomi- 
nated by  the  generic  term  of  the  Tarbat.  A  detail  of  the  tour  through  this  island,  in- 
fluenced as  it  was  by  a  variety  of  accidental  circumstances,  will  perhaps  be  less  interest- 
ing to  the  reader  than  a  brief  account  of  its  result,  in  the  form  of  a  general  description. 
In  the  view  here  given  ON  THE  ISLE  OF  JURA,  are  comprised  some  of  its  characteristic 
features.  It  represents  a  small  harbour  on  the  east  coast  between  Lagg  Ferry  and  the 
port  of  Small  Isles,  which  will  hereafter  be  noticed,  and  it  comprehends  the  summit  of 
one  of  the  Paps,  which  are  the  most  remarkable  objects  on  this  sterile  tract,  and  are  dis- 
tinguishable at  a  very  considerable  distance.  The  laird  of  the  isle  is  Archibald  Campbell, 
Esq.  of  Ardfin. 

Those  abrupt  and  singular  mountains  called  the  Paps  have  by  no  means  that  ma- 
millary  appearance  which  their  designation  seems  to  indicate.  They  are,  according  to 
Dr.  Jameson,  principally  composed  of  strata  of  a  granular  quartz,  elevated  at  an  angle  of 
forty-five  degrees,  and  dipping  to  the  south-west.  From  the  summit  the  strata  appear 

VOL.  III.  F  t° 


26  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

to  run  in  different  directions,  some  curved,  and  others  nearly  horizontal ;  but  these  ap- 
pearances are  probably  more  owing  to  the  situation  in  which  they  are  viewed,  and  to  the 
detrition  of  the  strata  by  rain,  than  to  any  alteration  in  their  dip  or  direction.  The 
southernmost  of  these  mountains  is  termed  Bienn-Achaolais,  "  the  mountain  of  the 
sound,"  as  being  near  the  sound  of  Ila ;  the  next  is  Bienn-un-Oir,  "  the  mountain  of  gold ;" 
the  third  Bienn-Sheunta,  "  the  sacred  mountain ;"  and  that  to  the  north  is  Corra-bienn, 
"  the  steep  mountain."  The  elevation  of  Bienn-an-Oir  is  estimated  at  2420  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea.  Notwithstanding  the  fatigue  of  such  an  undertaking,  it  would  have 
been  desirable  to  ascend  one  of  them ;  but  the  weather  at  this  period  was  so  unfavour- 
able, that  the  extensive  and  sublime  prospect  from  the  summit,  in  a  clear  state  of  the 
atmosphere,  would  have  been  totally  excluded.  In  this  prospect,  according  to  Mr.  Pen- 
nant, who  ascended  Bienn-an-Oir,  are  included  the  island  of  Ila,  and  beyond  that  the 
coast  of  Ireland ;  to  the  east  are  seen  Gigha,  Cantyre,  Arran,  and  the  Frith  of  Clyde, 
bordered  by  Ayrshire,  and  to  the  north-east  a  stupendous  tract  of  mountains  extending 
to  Ben-lomond.  Over  the  western  ocean  are  seen  Colonsay,  Oronsay,  Mull,  lona,  Staffa, 
and  the  neighbouring  isles,  and  still  farther  are  faintly  descried  the  islands  of  Coll  and 
Tiree. 

The  coast  of  Jura,  along  the  sound  of  Ila,  and  on  the  western  side,  is  rocky ;  the 
cliffs  are  in  some  places  of  considerable  height,  with  great  masses  detached  from  them, 
generally  of  a  pyramidal  form.  These  quartzy  masses,  by  further  decomposition,  form  a 
very  fine  sand,  which,  as  Dr.  Jameson  observes,  has  been  used  with  much  success  in  the 
making  of  glass.  The  land  on  this  western  side  is  little  susceptible  of  cultivation,  being 
wild,  rugged,  and  intersected  by  frequent  mountain- tor  rents.  On  the  east  side  the  coast 
is  rather  level,  having  a  gradual  ascent  at  a  small  distance  inland,  to  a  tract  of  arable  and 
pasture  ground,  which  forms  the  base  of  its  high  and  rocky  mountains. 

Lagg  Ferry,  situated  on  this  coast,  has  a  small  but  commodious  pier ;  and  a  very 
good  road  extends  from  it  through  the  island  to  a  ferry  on  the  south-west  shore,  opposite 
Port  Askaig  on  the  isle  of  Ila.  South-west  of  Lagg  Ferry  is  the  harbour  of  Small  Isles,  a 
capacious  bay  about  four  miles  in  extent.  Into  the  mouth  of  this  bay  extend  three  or 
four  islets,  which  leave  narrow  openings  to  the  harbour,  and  form  a  strong  barrier  to 
the  violence  of  the  sea. 

The  climate,  owing  to  the  prevalence  of  westerly  winds  from  the  Atlantic,  is  humid, 
but  the  air  in  general  is  so  temperate  as  to  be  favourable  to  longevity.  Several  instances 
are  mentioned  of  natives  who  have  passed  their  hundredth  year,  but  the  most  remarkable 
is  that  of  Gillour  Macrain,  who  is  said  to  have  kept  180  Christmases  in  his  own  house, 
and  died  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  The  favourable  influence  of  climate  can  hardly  be 
said  to  be  seconded  by  the  habits  of  the  people  in  promoting  this  duration  of  existence; 
they  are  not  only  exempt,  from  the  luxuries,  but  even  from  the  comforts  and  conveniencies 
of  civilized  life,  and  are  exposed  to  all  the  diseases  arising  from  defective  clothing  and 

scanty 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  27 

scanty  diet.  But  human  nature  accommodates  itself  more  readily  to  privation  than  to 
excess,  and  hence  it  is  that  instances  of  longevity  occur  most  frequently  where  the  enjoy- 
ments of  life  are  sparingly  distributed. 

Among  the  antiquities  of  Jura  may  be  mentioned  some  rude  obelisks,  eight  or  ten 
feet  in  height,  which  seem  to  have  been  the  burial-places  of  ancient  warriors,  since  beneath 
such  of  them  as  have  been  thrown  down  there  has  been  uniformly  found  a  small  urn, 
containing  ashes  and  some  coins. 

The  mountains  still  afford  shelter  to  several  kinds  of  red  deer;  and  here  are  also 
found  abundance  of  grouse  and  black  game.  The  high  grounds  afford  pasturage  to 
numerous  herds  of  sheep,  and  these,  as  well  as  the  game,  are  exposed  to  the  depredations 
of  eagles.  During  the  period  of  this  tour,  Dr.  Jura,  the  son  of  the  laird  of  the  isle, 
visited  an  eagle's  nest  near  one  of  the  Paps  of  Jura:  it  was  about  five  feet  in  diameter, 
and  there  were  two  young  ones  in  it.  Near  them  lay  a  brace  of  moor  game  and  a  crow, 
as  well  picked  as  if  they  had  come  from  the  hands  of  a  poulterer :  there  was  a  lamb  also. 
His  intention  was  to  destroy  the  old  birds,  if  possible,  as  well  as  the  young  ones,  on  ac- 
count of  the  great  havock  they  made  among  the  flocks.  In  conversing  on  the  strength 
of  these  formidable  animals,  he  stated,  as  a  well  known  fact,  that  an  eagle  once  took  up 
a  child  which  its  mother  had  wrapped  up  in  a  piece  of  flannel  and  laid  down  by  a  stock 
of  oats  (it  being  harvest  season)  and  flew  with  it  from  Scarba  to  Jura.  Some  of  the 
people  of  Jura  observing  the  eagle  descend,  with  what  they  supposed  to  be  a  lamb  in  his 
talons,  hastened  to  the  place  where  he  alighted,  and,  to  their  surprise,  found  the  infant 
unhurt,  with  the  wrapping  around  it  scarcely  discomposed. 

The  tour  was  extended  across  the  sound  of  Ila,  through  which  the  tide  ran  at  the  rate 
of  about  seven  knots  an  hour  in  mid  channel,  to  Port  Askaig,  a  convenient  harbour  for  small 
vessels.  After  recrossing  the  sound,  and  paying  a  visit  to  the  laird  of  Jura,  the  voyage  was 
resumed  from  Lagg  Ferry  to  Taerallic.  Landing  there,  and  returning  to  Duntrune,  the 
next  excursion  was  a  most  delightful  ride  of  six  hours  over  the  mountains  to  Inverary, 
situated  on  a  small  bay  at  the  head  of  Loch  Fyne,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Aray.  The 
scenery  for  the  greater  part  of  the  way  was  grand  and  striking,  and  the  approach  to  that 
town,  through  a  country  abounding  in  full  grown  wood,  was  uncommonly  fine.  The 
most  attractive  feature  in  the  prospect  is  INVERARY  CASTLE,  the  principal  seat  of  the 
Duke  of  Argyle,  on  the  western  side  of  the  loch,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given.  It  stands 
on  a  gentle  slope  in  a  spacious  and  noble  park,  bounded  on  one  side  by  an  amphitheatre 
of  well  wooded  hills,  and  on  the  other  by  Loch  Fyne,  which,  expanding  in  front  of  the 
mansion,  forms  an  irregular  circle  about  twelve  miles  in  circumference,  beautifully  in- 
dented by  small  promontories,  and  backed  by  a  grand  range  of  highland  scenery.  The 
castle  is  a  modern  edifice.  Its  principal  hall  is  a  spacious  apartment  surrounded  by  a 
gallery,  in  which  there  is  an  organ.  Here  are  suspended  arms  and  other  characteristics 
of  a  Highland  castle.  Among  the  other  apartments  the  large  drawing-room  is  particu- 
larly 


28  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN 

larly  worthy  of  notice,  as  containing  some  of  the  finest  specimens  of  the  Gobelin  tapestry 
in  this  kingdom.  Among  the  portraits  is  a  head  of  the  celebrated  Earl  of  Argyle,  who 
was  put  to  death  in  the  reign  of  James  II.  for  having  favoured  the  unsuccessful  attempt 
of  the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  and  whose  magnanimity  is  so  well  described  in  the  historical 
fragment  of  Mr.  Fox.  It  ought  to  be  mentioned,  that  the  plantations  which  now  adorn 
this  seat  originated  chiefly  with  him,  or  at  least  that  he  set  the  example  of  that  good 
taste  which  his  successors  have  so  spiritedly  followed.  Since  the  year  1745,  when  the 
present  edifice  was  founded,  it  is  calculated  that  ,£250,000  have  been  expended  in  planta- 
tion and  other  works  of  utility  and  decoration  on  this  property,  and  that  the  late  duke 
laid  out  at  least  three  thousand  pounds  per  annum  in  similar  improvements.  In  so 
flourishing  a  state  are  the  woods  and  plantations  at  present,  that  the  thinning  of  them 
produces  at  least  J1500  annually.  From  this  fact  may  be  calculated  the  great  benefits 
which  Scotland  will  one  day  derive  from  the  extensive  plantations  with  which  various  parts 
of  her  territory  have  since  been  covered. 

The  present  town  of  Inverary  is  small,  consisting  chiefly  of  one  row  of  houses  facing 
the  loch;  they  are  well  built  and  of  uniform  structure.  The  old  town,  situated  on  the 
north  side  of  the  bay,  on  the  lawn  before  the  castle,  being  an  irregular  straggling  village, 
was  rased  when  the  site  of  the  present  one  was  chosen.  Inverary  was  erected  into  a 
royal  burgh  by  a  charter  from  Charles  the  First,  dated  at  Carisbrooke  Castle  in  the 
Isle  of  Wight,  28th  January,  1648.  It  is  governed  by  a  provost,  two  bailies,  and  a 
council,  nominated  by  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  who  is  the  proprietor  of  the  whole  town. 
Though  tolerably  well  situated  for  manufactures,  none  of  any  great  extent  are  carried  on 
here.  About  the  year  1748  the  linen  manufacture  was  introduced  into  the  neighbourhood 
by  Archibald,  Duke  of  Argyle,  with  some  success.  A  less  fortunate  attempt  was  made 
in  1766  to  introduce  the  woollen  manufacture,  which,  notwithstanding  the  public-spirited 
exertions  and  munificence  of  the  then  duke,  seconded  by  many  gentlemen  of  the  county, 
did  not  flourish. 

The  great  support  of  Inverary  is  the  herring-fishery  of  Loch  Fyne.  It  generally 
begins  in  July,  and  sometimes  continues  until  the  first  of  January.  In  the  height  of  the 
season,  according  to  the  hyperbolical  adage  of  the  country,  the  loch  contains  one  part  of 
water  and  two  parts  of  herrings.  They  are,  and  have  been,  from  time  immemorial,  re- 
puted the  finest  both  in  size  and  quality  that  Scotland  produces.  The  extent  of  the 
loch,  to  its  junction  with  the  sea,  exceeds  thirty  miles ;  and  in  the  single  bay  of  Inverary, 
at  its  inland  extremity,  500  or  600  boats  are  sometimes  employed  in  the  fishery,  and  the 
groups  of  them  with  their  circling  nets  form  an  interesting  picture.  The  night  is  the 
time  of  fishing ;  in  the  day-time  the  crews  take  their  rest,  or  employ  themselves  in  ex- 
tracting the  entrails  from  the  fish  they  have  taken,  occasionally  amusing  themselves  with 
singing  Celtic  ballads  to  the  sound  of  the  bag-pipe.  Each  boat  clears  on  an  average 
between  ,£40  and  £50  for  the  season,  and  in  some  very  productive  seasons  .£100,  besides 

a  supply 


Inverary  Castle,  Argyleshire 


Dunolly  Castle,  near  Oban,  Argylshire 


VOYAGE  ROUXD  GREAT  BRITAIN.  29 

a  supply  of  fish  reserved  for  domestic  consumption.  In  an  evening,  when  the  fishing 
commences,  a  number  of  boats  form  a  line  across  the  loch,  and  uniting  their  nets,  produce 
a  chain  often  more  than  100  fathoms  long.  The  herrings  swim  at  very  uncertain  depths, 
so  that  it  is  necessary  to  sink  the  nets  to  the  depth  which  the  shoal  is  known  to  take.  Of 
course  the  success  of  the  fishers  must  in  a  great  measure  depend  upon  their  judgment  or 
good  fortune,  in  taking  the  proper  depths ;  and  it  will  frequently  happen  that  the  nets  of 
one  boat  are  full  of  herrings,  whilst  those  of  others  scarcely  take  a  single  fish.  They 
swim  sometimes  in  twenty  fathoms  water,  sometimes  in  fifty,  and  even  at  the  bottom 
of  the  loch.  The  herrings,  when  cleared  of  the  entrails,  are  thrown  into  a  tub  with  a 
sprinkling  of  salt ;  they  are  then  closely  packed  in  barrels  with  alternate  layers  of  salt, 
and  after  remaining  in  this  state  for  a  few  weeks,  they  are  repacked  into  other  barrels  for 
exportation.  A  considerable  quantity,  however,  are  sent  fresh  to  Glasgow,  Stirling,  and 
other  parts  of  the  country. 

Returning  from  Inverary  to  Duntrune,  a  fine  view  was  obtained  of  Loch  Awe, 
bounded  by  steep  mountains,  and  presenting  many  picturesque  features.  The  surface  of 
this  lake  is  estimated  at  108  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  It  is  nearly  thirty  miles  in 
length,  but  in  average  breadth  little  more  than  one  mile.  There  is  a  peculiarity  which 
many  lakes  do  not  possess,  which  is,  that  besides  a  number  of  rivulets  and  mountain- 
streams  on  either  side,  it  receives  at  each  extremity  a  considerable  river,  and  discharges 
itself  laterally  into  Loch  Etive,  an  arm  of  the  sea  to  the  northward.  Among  the  wild 
romantic  scenery  which  bounds  the  view  in  that  direction  is  distinguished  the  huge  and 
precipitous  mountain  of  Cruachan  Ben. 

In  resuming  the  voyage  from  Duntrune  it  was  considered  highly  desirable  to  obtain, 
if  possible,  a  view  of  the  tremendous  whirlpool  of  Corrievrekan.  On  landing  on  the 
northern  part  of  the  Isle  of  Jura,  an  elevated  spot  presented  itself  for  this  purpose;  but 
the  weather  was  unfortunately  so  hazy,  that  the  hope  of  beholding  this  phenomenon  was 
frustrated.  Its  roar,  and  the  terrific  rapidity  of  the  current  within  view,  impressed  the 
imagination  with  something  indescribably  awful,  and  created  an  intense  anxiety  to  con- 
template the  entire  reality  of  the  scene. 

The  boat,  by  the  alternate  aid  of  sail  and  oar,  reached  Long  Island,  a  dreary,  sterile 
tract,  which,  with  the  neighbouring  isle  of  Suyl,  is  valuable  chiefly  for  its  slate  quarries. 
These,  and  the  islets  near  them,  have  the  same  cheerless  appearance — a  succession  of 
rock  and  heath,  destitute  of  wood,  and  exhibiting  few  signs  of  cultivation.  The  sea 
which  divides  them  has  much  the  character  of  a  lake,  from  the  variety  of  coast  and  head- 
land which  on  every  hand  presents  itself.  The  islanders  live  in  a  state  which  scarcely 
commands  the  bare  necessaries  of  life.  Their  huts  are  without  chimneys,  and  the  smoke 
of  their  peat  fires,  having  no  outlet  but  by  the  doors  and  windows,  impairs  their  eye- 
sight most  seriously.  A  consciousness  of  their  condition  seems  to  have  produced  an 
indifference  to  domestic  comfort:  shelter  and  warmth  being  the  utmost  that  they  can 

VOL.  in.  G  command, 


30  VOYAGE    ROUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

command,  they  put  up  with  shelter  without  cheerfulness,  and  warmth  without  cleanliness. 
This  kind  of  indifference  is  ever  the  characteristic  of  extreme  and  hopeless  poverty,  and 
its  only  antidote  is  that  active  spirit  of  emulation  which  successful  industry  generates : 
in  the  present  instance,  let  the  incentives  to  industry  be  given,  and  the  social  condition 
of  the  people  must  spontaneously  improve.  They  are  the  descendants  of  a  race  of 
warriors  who,  in  days  of  yore,  flourished  in  these  regions :  the  spirit  of  their  forefathers 
is  abated,  but  not  extinguished  in  them ;  and  it  might  be  possible,  in  reviving  that  spirit, 
to  give  it  a  direction  consistent  with  the  present  state  of  things,  and  calculated  to  ensure 
to  them  a  larger  share  in  the  interests  of  the  country. 

The  ruins  of  ancient  fortifications  in  this  vicinity  are  vestiges  of  the  feudal  grandeur 
by  which  it  was  once  distinguished.  In  proceeding  to  describe  those  of  the  CASTLE  OP 
DUNOLLY,  on  the  coast  of  Argyleshire,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given,  it  may  be  allowable 
to  cite  the  account  given  of  it  by  Mr.  Walter  Scott,  in  a  note  to  the  first  canto  of  his 
"  Lord  of  the  Isles."  After  relating  the  reverses  which  deprived  the  house  of  Macdougal 
of  a  great  portion  of  their  possessions,  he  observes,  that  the  castle  of  Dunolly,  near  Oban, 
with  its  dependencies,  was  the  principal  part  of  what  remained  to  them,  with  their  right 
of  chieftainship  over  the  families  of  their  name  and  blood.  These  they  continued  to 
enjoy  until  the  year  1715,  when  the  representative  incurred  the  penalty  of  forfeiture  for 
his  accession  to  the  insurrection  of  that  period ;  thus  losing  the  remains  of  his  inheritance, 
to  replace  upon  the  throne  the  descendants  of  those  princes  whose  accession  his  ancestors 
had  opposed  at  the  expense  of  their  feudal  grandeur.  The  estate  was  however  restored 
about  1745,  to  the  father  of  the  present  proprietor,  whom  family  experience  had  taught 
the  hazard  of  interfering  with  the  established  government,  and  who  remained  quiet  upon 
that  occasion.  He  therefore  regained  his  property  when  many  of  the  highland  chiefs 
lost  theirs. 

"  Nothing  can  be  more  wildly  beautiful  than  the  situation  of  Dunolly.  The  ruins 
are  situated  upon  a  bold  and  precipitous  promontory  overhanging  Loch  Etive,  and  distant 
about  a  mile  from  the  village  and  port  of  Oban.  The  principal  part  which  remains  is  the 
donjon  or  keep;  but  fragments  of  other  buildings,  overgrown  with  ivy,  attest  that  it  had 
been  once  a  place  of  importance,  as  large  apparently  as  Artornish  or  Dunstaffnage. 
These  fragments  inclose  a  court-yard,  of  which  the  keep  probably  formed  one  side ;  the 
entrance  being  by  a  steep  ascent,  from  the  neck  of  the  isthmus,  formerly  cut  across  by  a 
moat,  and  defended  doubtless  by  outworks  and  a  drawbridge.  Beneath  the  castle 
stands  the  present  mansion  of  the  family,  having  on  the  one  hand  Loch  Etive  with  its 
islands  and  mountains,  on  the  other  two  romantic  eminences  covered  with  copse-wood. 
There  are  other  accompaniments  suited  to  the  scene ;  in  particular  a  huge  upright  pillar, 
or  detached  fragment  of  that  sort  of  rock  called  plum-pudding  stone,  upon  the  shore, 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  castle.  It  is  called  Clach-na-can,  or  the  Dog's  Pillar, 
because  Fingal  is  said  to  have  used  it  as  a  stake  to  which  he  bound  his  celebrated  dog 

Bran. 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  31 

Bran.  Others  say,  that  when  the  Lord  of  the  Isles  came  upon  a  visit  to  the  Lord  of 
Lorn,  the  dogs  brought  for  his  sport  were  kept  beside  this  pillar.  Upon  the  whole  a 
more  delightful  and  romantic  spot  can  scarcely  be  conceived ;  and  it  receives  a  moral 
interest  from  the  considerations  attached  to  the  residence  of  a  family  once  powerful 
enough  to  confront  and  defeat  Robert  Bruce,  and  now  sunk  into  the  shade  of  private  life. 
It  is  at  present  possessed  by  Patrick  Macdougal,  Esq.  the  lineal  and  undisputed  repre- 
sentative of  the  ancient  lords  of  Lorn.  The  heir  of  Dunolly  fell  lately  in  Spain,  fighting 
under  the  Duke  of  Wellington — a  death  well  becoming  his  ancestry." 

Vicissitudes  equally  remarkable  with  those  which  are  here  exemplified  must  have 
befallen  many  of  the  families  which  once  held  sway  in  these  districts.  The  distinction 
of  clans,  though  originating  in  the  patriarchal  form  of  society,  and  suited  to  a  pastoral 
community,  could  not  fail  to  be  productive  of  much  evil  among  a  people  whose  habits 
were  warlike.  By  separating  the  interests  of  men  dwelling  on  the  same  soil,  and  speaking 
the  same  language,  it  scattered  among  them  the  seeds  of  perpetual  discord.  The  vassals 
of  a  chieftain,  priding  themselves  in  the  notion  of  being  "  children  of  his  house,"  held 
themselves  bound  to  execute  any  enterprise  which  his  policy,  or  his  ambition,  or  his 
interest,  might  dictate.  This  feeling  of  attachment  imposed  upon  him  the  consequent 
obligation  of  providing  for  a  train  of  dependents,  too  turbulent  to  pursue  any  peaceful 
occupation,  and  disdaining  all  exercises  except  those  of  warfare  and  the  chase.  In  the 
total  absence,  or  under  the  precarious  control  of  a  supreme  authority,  each  chieftain 
assumed  in  a  great  degree  the  rights  of  sovereignty,  and  claimed  the  privilege  of  going  to 
war  or  of  making  peace  with  his  neighbours.  The  law  of  force  was  paramount ;  the 
sword  was  resorted  to  for  the  decision  of  every  quarrel ;  the  pretexts  for  plunder  and 
retaliation  were  endless,  and  the  sanguinary  contests  of  rival  or  hostile  tribes  seldom 
terminated  until  one  was  ruined,  or  until  both  were  so  exhausted  as  to  fall  an  easy  prey 
to  a  third.  During  the  struggles  which  preceded  the  establishment  of  regular  government, 
this  state  of  things  gradually  changed  ;  those  chieftains  who  purchased  security  by  allegi- 
ance became  instrumental  in  subjugating  or  in  gaining  over  the  rest ;  but  the  system  of 
clanship  and  vassalage,  though  altered,  was  still  preserved,  and  in  the  course  of  subse- 
quent revolutions  it  was  not  wholly  extinguished.  Its  principal  supporters,  however, 
sustained  a  total  reverse  of  fortune,  and  became  interested  in  its  abolition.  No  longer 
formidable  in  a  political  point  of  view,  it  has  retained  merely  its  amiable  features — that 
veneration  of  ancestry,  and  that  regard  for  family-honour,  which  induce  men  of  the 
same  name,  however  different  in  rank  or  fortune,  to  consider  each  other  as  united  by  the 
ties  of  consanguinity. 

We  landed  atOban,  a  village  situated  on  a  fine  bay  in  the  Sound  of  Mull,  sheltered  by  the 
island  ofKerrera.  Thisbayisof  a  semicircular  form,  from  twelve  to  twenty -four  fathoms  deep, 
and  capable  of  containing  three  hundred  sail  of  merchant  vessels.  It  is  admirably  adapted 
for  a  fishing  station,  and  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most  convenient  places  for  commerce 

c  2  on 


32  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

ou  the  west  coast  of  Argyleshire.  About  forty-seven  years  ago  it  was  constituted  one  of 
the  ports  of  the  custom-house ;  and  in  order  to  encourage  its  rising  trade,  the  Duke  of 
Argyle,  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Campbell  of  Dunstaffnage,  and  other  persons  possessing 
landed  property  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  village,  granted  building  leases  to  a  con- 
siderable extent,  which  soon  attracted  a  number  of  settlers  from  the  country  around. 
Two  brothers  of  the  name  of  Stevenson,  who  established  themselves  here  in  1778,  are 
mentioned  as  having,  by  their  spirit  and  industry  in  various  branches  of  traffic,  contributed 
greatly  to  the  prosperity  of  Oban.  They  engaged  in  a  considerable  coasting  trade,  con- 
sisting in  cattle,  hides,  kelp,  meal,  together  with  a  variety  of  merchandize  for  the  supply 
of  the  islands  and  the  neighbouring  districts  of  Argyleshire.  For  such  a  trade  this  port 
is  admirably  suited  by  a  combination  of  favourable  circumstances.  It  is  defended  from 
westerly  and  southerly  winds  by  the  isle  of  Kerrera  before  mentioned,  which  at  a  small 
distance  stretches  across  the  bay.  It  lies  in  the  track  of  the  fishing  vessels  and  coasters 
passing  to  and  from  the  north  highlands;  and  being  situated  near  the  entrance  of  the 
great  Loch  Linnhe,  has  a  navigable  communication  with  an  extensive  range  of  country, 
and  will  certainly  participate  in  the  advantages  derivable  from  the  completion  of  the 
Caledonian  canal. 

The  Isle  of  Kerrera  is  about  four  miles  in  length,  and  two  in  breadth.  It  is  the 
property  of  Mr.  Macdougal  of  Dunolly,  with  the  exception  of  one  farm  belonging  to  the 
Earl  of  Breadalbane.  Its  surface  is  hilly,  and  commands  some  fine  views  of  the  moun- 
tains of  Mull  and  the  rugged  wilds  of  Morven. 

On  a  promontory  extending  into  Loch  Etive  are  situated  the  ruins  of  the  CASTLE 
OF  DUNSTAFFNAGE,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given.  Various  tourists  and  topographers 
have  ascribed  its  foundation  to  Ewen,  a  Pictish  monarch,  contemporary  with  Julius 
Caesar,  who  called  it  after  himself,  Evenium.  They  also  repeat  the  tradition,  that  this 
ancient  fortress  was  the  place  in  which  the  celebrated  Scottish  coronation-stone,  now 
deposited  in  Westminster  Abbey,  was  formerly  kept.  It  is  said  to  have  been  removed 
from  hence  to  Scone,  by  Kenneth  the  Second.  In  1307  the  castle  was  in  the  possession 
of  Alexander  Macdougal,  Lord  of  Argyle,  but  it  was  reduced  in  that  year  by  Robert 
Bruce,  who  placed  in  this  important  strong-hold  a  garrison  and  a  governor  of  his  own. 
About  the  year  1455,  it  appears  to  have  been  the  residence  of  the  Lords  of  the  Isles,  for 
hither  it  was,  observes  Pennant,  that  James,  the  last  Earl  of  Douglas,  after  his  defeat  in 
Annandale,  fled  to  Donald,  the  regulus  of  the  time,  and  prevailed  on  him  to  take  arms, 
and  to  carry  on  a  predatory  war  against  his  sovereign,  James  the  Second.  Concerning 
its  subsequent  history  there  are  few  remarkable  particulars  on  record  :  it  shared  the  com- 
mon fate  of  the  Hebridean  castles,  and  in  its  present  condition  affords  a  very  interesting 
specimen  of  their  peculiar  construction.  Placed  on  a  rock  near  the  sea,  the  approach  to 
it  on  that  side  was  by  a  narrow  staircase :  there  was  formerly  a  drawbridge,  which  was 
let  fall  from  the  gate  of  the  building  to  the  top  of  this  staircase,  so  that  any  one  having 

ascended 


Dunstaffnage  Castle,  Argylshire 


Clam-shell  Cave,  Staffa,  lona  in  the  distance 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  33 

ascended  it  with  a  hostile  purpose  found  himself  in  a  state  of  exposed  and  precarious 
elevation,  with  a  gulf  between  him  and  the  object  of  his  attack.  Considered  with  re- 
ference to  the  warfare  carried  on  in  ancient  times,  this  mode  of  fortification  seems  the 
most  efficacious  that  could  have  been'devised. 

The  scenery  on  the  shores  of  Loch  Etive  is  of  a  pleasing  character.  Some  of  the 
hills  have  a  wooded  appearance,  and  their  slopes  are  interspersed  with  meadows  and  corn- 
fields :  there  is  a  varied  succession  of  creeks  and  inlets,  presenting  at  every  turn  an  agree- 
able change  of  prospect.  The  inland  extremity  of  the  loch  terminates  in  Glen  Etie,  a 
valley  rendered  famous  by  Ossian's  poem  of  Darthula. 

The  voyage  was  resumed  from  Oban,  and  continued  across  the  mouth  of  Loch 
Linnhe.  On  a  rock  in  one  of  its  branches  stand  the  ruins  of  Castle  Stalkir,  formerly  a 
place  of  considerable  strength.  The  neighbouring  isle  of  Lismore  is  about  ten  miles  in 
length,  and  from  two  to  three  in  breadth.  It  was  anciently  the  residence  of  the  Bishop 
of  Argyle,  who,  from  this  circumstance,  was  frequently  named  Episcopus  Lismorensis. 
The  present  church  of  Lismore  is  the  chancel  of  the  old  cathedral,  new  roofed  about  fifty 
years  ago,  after  the  old  walls  had  been  lowered  from  ten  to  seven  feet.  In  the  island  are 
several  vestiges  of  fortified  camps,  and  an  old  castle  with  a  fosse  and  drawbridge,  said  to 
have  been  erected  by  the  Danes.  At  the  distance  of  about  half  a  mile  from  the  cathedral 
is  one  of  the  circular  towers  built  without  cement,  so  frequently  to  be  met  with  in  all  the 
western  isles  and  coasts,  called  Duns  or  Picts  houses. 

The  approach  to  Duart  Castle,  near  the  entrance  of  the  Sound  of  Mull,  is  not  very 
promising;  the  land  rises  in  a  gentle  slope,  but  immediately  opposite  to  it  the  coast  is 
very  bold  and  precipitous.  This  castle  formerly  belonged  to  the  warlike  and  powerful 
sept  of  the  Macleans,  and  is  celebrated  as  the  scene  of  Miss  Baillie's  beautiful  tragedy 
entitled  "  The  Family  Legend."  The  following  is  the  substance  of  the  story,  as  related 
in  the  preface  of  that  work.  "  In  the  fifteenth  century  a  feud  had  long  subsisted  between 
the  lord  of  Argyle  and  the  chieftain  of  Maclean  ;  the  latter  was  totally  subdued  by  the 
Campbells,  and  Maclean  sued  for  peace,  demanding,  at  the  same  time,  in  marriage,  the 
young  and  beautiful  daughter  of  Argyle.  His  request  was  granted,  and  the  lady  was 
carried  home  to  the  island  of  Mull.  There  she  had  a  son;  but  the  Macleans  were  hostile 
to  this  alliance  with  the  Campbells.  They  swore  to  desert  their  chief  if  they  were  not 
suffered  to  put  his  wife  to  death,  with  her  infant  son,  who  was  then  at  nurse,  that  the 
blood  of  the  Campbells  might  not  succeed  to  the  inheritance  of  Maclean.  Maclean 
resisted  these  threats,  fearing  the  power  and  vengeance  of  Argyle;  but  at  length  fear  for 
his  own  life,  should  he  refuse  the  demands  of  his  clan,  made  him  yield  to  their  fury,  and 
he  only  drew  from  them  a  promise  that  they  would  not  shed  her  blood.  One  dark  winter 
night  she  was  forced  into  a  boat,  and,  regardless  of  her  cries  and  lamentations,  left  upon 
a  barren  rock,  midway  between  the  coasts  of  Mull  and  Argyle,  which,  at  high  water,  is 
covered  with  the  sea.  As  she  was  about  to  perish  she  saw  a  boat  steering  its  course  at 

some 


34  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

some  distance ;  she  waved  her  hand,  and  uttered  a  feeble  cry.  She  was  now  upon  the 
top  of  the  rock,  and  the  water  as  high  as  her  breast,  so  that  the  boatmen  mistook  her  for 
a  large  bird.  They  took  her,  however,  from  the  rock,  and,  knowing  her  to  be  the  daughter 
of  Argyle,  carried  her  to  the  castle  of  her  father. 

"  The  earl  rewarded  her  deliverers,  and  desired  them  to  keep  the  circumstance 
secret  for  a  time,  during  which  he  concealed  her  till  he  should  hear  tidings  from  Mull. 
Maclean  solemnly  announced  her  death  to  Argyle,  and  soon  came  himself  with  his  friends, 
all  in  mourning,  to  condole  with  the  earl  at  the  castle.  Argyle  received  him,  clad  also 
in  black.  Maclean  was  full  of  lamentations ;  the  earl  appeared  very  sorrowful ;  a  feast 
was  served  with  great  pomp  in  the  hall ;  every  one  took  his  place,  while  a  seat  was  left 
empty  on  the  right  hand  of  Argyle;  the  door  opened,  and  they  beheld  the  lady  of 
Maclean  enter,  superbly  dressed,  to  take  her  place  at  the  table.  Maclean  stood  for  a 
moment  aghast,  when,  the  servants  and  retainers  making  a  lane  for  him  to  pass  through 
the  hall  to  the  gate  of  the  castle,  the  earl's  son,  the  Lord  of  Lome,  followed  him,  and  slew 
him  as  he  fled.  His  friends  were  detained  as  hostages  for  the  child,  who  had  been  pre- 
served by  the  affection  of  his  nurse.  So  far,  says  the  copy  of  the  legend  cited  by  the 
author,  the  story  is  authentic  as  delivered  from  age  to  age  in  ancient  Gaelic  songs,  and  it 
is  likewise  a  tradition  from  generation  to  generation  in  the  family  of  Argyle.  The  same 
authorities  also  add,  that  this  deserving  daughter  of  Argyle  was  rewarded  for  her  sufferings 
by  wedding,  with  her  father's  consent,  an  amiable  young  nobleman  who  adored  her,  and 
was  mutually  beloved.  To  this  man  her  father  had  formerly  refused  her  hand,  disposing 
of  her,  as  a  bond  of  union,  to  unite  the  warring  clans  of  Argyle  and  Maclean." 

This  story,  the  groundwork  of  a  deeply  interesting  tragedy,  bears  some  resemblance 
in  outline,  though  not  in  circumstances,  to  that  which  is  told  in  Mr.  Campbell's  brief  but 
exquisite  ballad  of  Glenara.  They  are  probably  of  one  common  origin.  The  catastrophe 
to  which  they  relate  is  a  signal  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  the  hostility  of  rival  clans 
could  be  carried.  A  chieftain  compelled  by  his  vassals  to  renounce  the  most  sacred  of 
domestic  ties,  and  to  compromise  his  character  by  sanctioning  an  act  of  the  most  delibe- 
rate and  inhuman  cruelty,  must  have  held  his  sway  by  a  very  precarious  tenure ;  and  the 
vassals  themselves  who  could  suffer  a  long  cherished  hatred  to  overcome  all  dread  of 
vengeance,  must  have  been  actuated  by  passions  and  feelings  very  different  from  those 
Avhich  belong  to  a  civilized  state  of  society.  The  love  of  dominion  must  have  been  para- 
mount with  both  parties,  and  to  that  powerful  incentive,  seconded  perhaps  by  supersti- 
tion and  prejudice,  every  sentiment  either  of  interest  or  affection  must  have  been  made 
to  give  way. 

Passing  onward  up  the  Sound  of  Mull,  it  would  have  been  unpardonable  to  omit  a 
visit  to  the  ruins  of  the  Castle  of  Artornish,  rendered  classic  ground  by  the  magnificent 
and  fertile  genius  of  Mr.  Walter  Scott.  They  are  situated  on  a  promontory  of  the  Morven, 
having  on  the  one  hand  a  precipitous  chain  of  rocks  overhanging  the  sea,  and  on  the 

other 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  35 

other  the  narrow  entrance  to  the  beautiful  salt-water  lake  called  Loch  Alline.  The  site 
is  undoubtedly  wild  and  romantic,  but  the  ruins  themselves  seemed  too  inconsiderable  to 
constitute  a  subject  for  delineation :  every  vestige  of  ancient  dignity  has  long  since  been 
obliterated ;  a  few  indistinct  fragments  are  all  that  remain  to  characterize  a  spot  which 
the  splendid  imagination  of  the  poet  has  invested  with  the  most  imposing  grandeur.  To 
depict  such  a  scene  in  its  actual  state  would  be  as  uninteresting  a  task  .as  to  give  a  view 
of  the  field  of  Runnimede  without  any  representation  of  the  important  transaction  from 
which  it  derives  its  historical  celebrity. 

The  navigation  of  the  Sound  of  Mull  presents  a  very  striking  combination  of  sublime 
and  romantic  scenery.  On  the  left  are  the  bold  and  mountainous  shores  of  the  island  of 
that  name,  and  on  the  right  those  of  Morven,  indented  by  deep  lochs,while  to  the  north- 
east the  view  is  bounded  by  the  stupendous  range  of  the  Ardnamurchan  hills.  The 
aspect  of  the  shores  is  in  many  places  improved  by  a  circumstance  which  involves  no 
very  exalted  association,  but  is  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  Scottish  coast.  This  is 
the  operation  of  kelp-burning,  the  smoke  arising  from  which,  and  spreading  along  the 
rocks  and  acclivities,  softens  the  ruggedness  of  their  forms,  and  produces  a  very  picturesque 
effect  in  certain  points  of  view. 

It  was  necessary  to  land  at  Aros  Bay  for  the  purpose  of  traversing  the  island  of  Mull 
to  Loch-na-gal,  on  its  western  side.  At  Aros  there  are  the  remains  of  a  castle,  once 
inhabited  by  Macdonald,  a  prince  of  the  isles. 

Mull  is,  for  the  most  part,  rugged  and  mountainous.  The  woods  which  are  said 
to  have  abounded  in  it  in  ancient  times  have  dwindled  away.  There  is  but  little  arable 
land,  consisting  in  general  of  some  detached  tracts  near  the  coast.  The  soil  even  there  is 
rather  sterile,  being  a  light  reddish  earth,  mixed  with  moss,  and  of  very  little  depth.  The 
common  crop  is  a  very  inferior  kind  of  oats,  called  by  the  inhabitants  small  oats. 

The  walk  from  Aros  to  the  plain  of  Knock,  at  the  head  of  Loch-na-gal,  was  fatiguing. 
The  weather  was  intensely  sultry,  and  as  the  way  led  among  barren  hills,  the  refraction  of  the 
sun's  rays  occasioned  a  great  augmentation  in  the  degree  of  heat,  to  mitigate  which  not  the 
slightest  shade  intervened.  The  annoyance  of  the  gadfly,  though  an  inconvenience  hardly 
worth  mentioning  in  a  pedestrian  excursion,  was  so  incessant,  that  it  added  greatly  to  the 
tediousness  of  the  way.  It  was  matter  of  some  astonishment  to  experience  this  oppres- 
sive heat  in  the  climate  of  the  Hebrides.  Having  arrived  at  Mishnish,  in  Knock,  the 
seat  of  Colonel  Donald  Campbell,  and  having  made  a  short  stay  there,  a  boat  was  pro- 
cured for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  to  Staffa,  which  object  was  accomplished  after  a 
pleasant  sail  in  very  favourable  weather.  This  celebrated  spot  seemed  the  more  worthy 
of  attention,  because  those  graphic  delineations  of  it  which  have  obtained  most  circula- 
tion are  now  found  to  be  inadequate  to  the  subject,  and  in  many  respects  utterly  erro- 
neous. This  remark  will  be  understood  to  apply  to  the  engravings  in  Mr.  Pennant's 
tour,  from  drawings  by  his  servant,  Moses  Griffiths,  which  have  been  so  carelessly  copied 

in 


36  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN, 

in  several  publications  on  the  continent,  that  the  various  objects  have  been  reversed  in 
their  position,  and  their  relative  proportions  still  more  incorrectly  given  than  in  the 
originals.  The  remoteness  of  the  place,  and  the  difficulties  to  be  apprehended  from  the 
precarious  state  of  the  weather  in  these  seas,  may  have  tended  to  discourage  any  attempt 
to  remedy  these  errors  by  a  more  accurate  series  of  drawings ;  and  the  present  opportu- 
nity, therefore,  was  too  propitious  to  be  neglected.  The  CLAM-SHELL  CAVE,  of  which 
a  view  is  here  given,  was  the  first  subject  that  presented  itself.  Its  name  originated  in  a 
fancied  resemblance  to  a  shell  of  that  description.  The  disposition  of  the  variously  curved 
columns  above  it,  extending  from  40  to  50  feet  without  a  joint,  may  be  considered  as  one 
of  the  most  striking  features  in  the  whole  island.  There  is  a  very  extraordinary  aggrega- 
tion of  columns  off  this  cave,  forming  a  conical  detached  rock,  corruptly  called  Boo-sha-la. 
The  Gaelic  name,  Buachaille,  "  the  herdsman,"  is  commonly  applied  to  conspicuous 
single  rocks  all  over  the  country.  This  rock  consists  of  variously  inclined  columns  resting 
against  each  other,  and  meeting  till  they  form  a  conical  body,  which  appears  to  repose 
on  a  bed  of  curved  and  horizontal  columns. 

Before  adverting  to  the  succeeding  views  in  detail,  it  may  be  necessary  to  present 
the  reader  with  a  general  description  of  the  island.  This  purpose,  it  is  hoped,  Avill  be 
most  satisfactorily  answered  by  the  following  extract  from  a  very  able  paper  by  Dr.  Mac 
Culloch,  in  the  second  volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Geological  Society. 

"  The  circumference  of  Staffa  is  estimated  at  about  two  miles.  It  forms  a  sort  of 
table  land  of  an  irregular  surface,  bounded  on  all  sides  by  perpendicular  cliffs,  varying  in 
altitude,  and  broken  into  numerous  recesses  and  promontories. 

"  It  is  intersected  by  one  deep  cut,  scarcely  to  be  called  a  valley,  which  divides  the 
higher  and  more  celebrated  columnar  part  from  the  remainder  of  the  island.  At  the 
highest  tides  this  more  remarkably  columnar  part,  which  forms  its  south-western  side, 
appears  to  terminate  almost  abruptly  in  the  water,  but  the  retiring  tide  shews  a  causeway 
of  broken  columns,  forming  a  sort  of  beach  at  its  foot.  Round  the  other  sides  of  the 
island  there  is  also  a  beach  of  varying  breadth,  consisting  of  detached  fragments,  and  of 
rocks  jutting  out  into  the  sea  in  many  irregular  directions.  This  beach,  when  the  weather 
is  perfectly  calm,  will,  under  due  precautions,  afford  landing  in  various  places,  but  it  is 
on  the  eastern  side  that  the  most  numerous  landing-places  occur.  Various  narrow  creeks, 
sheltered  by  the  island  itself  from  the  predominant  western  swell,  admit  of  easy  access  in 
moderate  weather,  provided  the  wind  is  in  any  direction  from  south-west  to  north-west; 
and  for  the  encouragement  of  the  mineralogist  who  may  be  terrified  at  the  exaggerated 
reports  of  this  difficulty,  I  can  assure  him  that  I  have  landed  on  Staffa  when  the  vessels 
that  navigated  this  sea  have  had  their  sails  reefed,  and  the  boatmen  of  lona  and  Ulva 
have  called  it  impracticable.  The  love  of  the  marvellous  has  conferred  on  Staffa  a  terrific 
reputation,  which  a  greater  resort  has  discovered  to  be  somewhat  akin  to  Scylla  and 
Chary  bdis. 

"It 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  3? 

"  It  is  easy  to  perceive  from  the  southward,  that  with  this  flat  disposition  of  its  sur- 
face, and  notwithstanding  its  irregularities,  Staffa  possesses  a  gentle  inclination  towards 
the  north-east,  although  no  opportunity  is  afforded  for  ascertaining  the  precise  dip.  It 
is  of  no  importance  to  ascertain  it,  nor  can  it  amount  to  more  than  five  or  six  degrees  of 
variation  from  the  horizontal  plane. 

"  The  highest  of  the  perpendicular  faces  which  bound  it  rise  about  sixty  or  seventy 
feet  above  the  high-water  mark,  and  those  are  on  the  south-western  side,  where  the  most 
remarkable  columns,  and  where  the  greatest  caves  exist." 

It  becomes  necessary  in  this  place,  for  the  sake  of  illustrating  the  idea  thus  suggested 
of  the  columnar  boundary  of  this  part  of  the  island,  to  advert  to  the  view  here  given,  en- 
titled, the  EXTERIOR  OF  FINGAL'S  CAVE,  as  it  presents  itself  to  the  beholder  on  rounding 
the  south-eastern  point.  To  those  who  have  perused  the  enthusiastic  descriptions  of 
Staffa  which  have  been  given  by  various  tourists,  it  may  be  a  source  of  some  disappoint- 
ment to  find  that  the  reality  by  no  means  justifies  the  notions  they  had  been  led  to  form, 
and  that  the  optics  of  a  poet's  fancy  must  be  requisite  to  convert  the  scene  before  them 
into  the  end  of  an  immense  cathedral,  whose  massy  roof  is  supported  by  stupendous  pil- 
lars formed  with  all  the  regularity  of  art.  The  epithets  immense  and  stupendous  are  cheap 
and  convenient  ingredients  in  that  sort  of  composition  which  belongs  to  the  superlative 
degree ;  but  they  are  of  very  vague  import,  and  of  very  equivocal  utility  in  simple  de- 
scription, nor  can  there  well  be  a  more  trite  and  at  the  same  time  a  more  unfortunate 
way  of  helping  us  to>  conceive  the  grandeur  of  an  object,  than  to  tell  us  that  it  is  grand 
beyond  conception.  Magnitude  is  one  of  the  requisites  of  grandeur;  and  when  we  con- 
sider that  the  height  of  the  perpendicular  faces  does  not  exceed  the  dimensions  above 
given,  and  that  the  greatest  elevation  of  the  island  cannot  be  more,  as  Dr.  Mac  Culloch 
observes,  than  a  hundred  and  twenty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  we  are  naturally 
disposed  to  distrust  every  account  so  characterized  by  indefinite  exaggeration.  It  is  for 
this  reason  among  others  that  the  preference  is  due  to  his  paper  on  Staffa  over  those 
which  have  so  long  challenged  the  wonder  of  the  public ;  he  has  forborne  to  stimulate 
curiosity  by  hyperbolical  comparisons,  and  delivering  his  statements  in  plain  and  direct 
language,  has  reduced  the  prevalent  opinions  on  the  subject  to  a  more  just  and  reasonable 
standard. 

It  has  long  been  the  fashion,  in  describing  any  natural  curiosity  in  Avhich,  as  in  the 
present  instance,  some  degree  of  regularity  is  apparent,  to  contrast  it  with  a  work  of  art, 
and  to  insist  on  this  contrast  as  a  source  of  still  higher  admiration.  Dr.  Uno  Van  Troil, 
the  learned  companion  of  Sir  Joseph  Banks  on  his  visit  to  Staffa,  alludes,  in  his  account 
of  Fingal's  Cave,  to  the  magnificent  remains  of  ancient  architecture,  and  says,  that  this 
piece  of  nature's  workmanship  far  surpasses  every  thing  that  invention,  luxury,  and  taste 
ever  produced  among  the  Greeks.  M.  Faujas  de  St.  Fond  is  equally  enthusiastic  in  his 
admiration  of  this  phenomenon,  and  declares,  that  among  all  the  basaltic  causeways  and 

VOL.  in.  u  caverns 


38  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

caverns  in  the  midst  of  lava  which  he  has  visited,  he  never  found  any  thing  comparable 
with  it  for  the  admirable  regularity  of  the  columns,  the  height  of  the  arch,  the  situation, 
the  form,  the  elegance  of  this  production  of  nature,  or  its  resemblance  to  the  master- 
pieces of  art.     Dr.  Garnett  very  faithfully  echoes  this  strain  of  encomium,  and  superadds 
a  few  variations  of  his  own.     Regularity,  says  he,  is  the  only  part  in  which  art  pretends 
to  excel  nature,  but  here  nature  has  shown,  that,  when  she  pleases,  she  can  set  man  at 
naught  even  in  this  respect,  and  make  him  sensible  of  his  own  littleness.     "  Her  works," 
he  adds,  "  are  in  general  distinguished  by  a  grand  sublimity,  in  which  she  disdains  the 
similar  position  of  parts,  called  by  man  regularity,  but  which,  in  fact,  may  be  another 
name  for  narrowness  of  conception  and  poverty  of  idea;  but  here,  in  a  playful  mood, 
she  has  produced  a  regular  piece  of  workmanship,  and  on  a  scale  so  immense  as  to  make 
all  the  temples,  built  by  the  hand  of  man,  hide  their  diminished  heads."     Now,  that  this 
lusus  natures,  does  not  possess  the  degree  of  regularity  which  is  here  ascribed  to  it,  is 
evinced  by  the  accompanying  view,  entitled  the  ENTRANCE  TO  FINGAL'S  CAVE,  in 
which  the  positions  of  the  basaltic  columns,  and  fragments  of  columns  that  form  it,  are 
carefully,  and,  it  is  hoped,  accurately  delineated.     It  is  an  object  that  excites  wonder 
and  astonishment  most  certainly,  and  these  feelings  are  heightened  by  our  conjectures  as 
to  the  mysterious  process  which  effected  this  resemblance  to  the  productions  of  human 
skill  and  labour.     But,  with  such  productions,  this  process,  whatever  it  may  be,  has  no 
farther  affinity ;  it  is  an  emanation  of  those  laws,  and  a  part  of  that  sublime  scale  of 
operations  by  which  the  world  itself  was  created,  and  is  upheld.     Contemplated  in  this 
point  of  view,  it  enters  into  that  infinite  series  of  wonders  by  which  the  Omnipotent  has 
manifested  himself;  and  which  may  be  traced  equally  in  the  crystallization  of  minerals, 
the  structure,  organization  and  economy  of  plants  and  animals,  the  formation  of  the  globe 
which  we  inhabit,  and  of  the  system  of  the  universe  of  which  it  constitutes  a  part.     In 
this  series  the  human  mind  must  have  its  station  and  degree  assigned  to  it,  and  together 
with  all  its  results,  must  be  regarded  as  one  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  which  testifies 
a  supreme  intelligence.     Wherever  man  has  exercised  the  high  privilege  with  which  his 
Creator  endowed  him,  "  to  replenish  the  earth  and  subdue  it,"  wherever  the  traces  of  his 
thought  and  contrivance  exist,  there  exist  so  many  indications  of  that  intelligence  ; — so 
many  refracted  rays  from  the  living  fountain  of  light.     A  natural  phenomenon  like  StafFa 
cannot  interest  the  feelings  more  powerfully  than  the  ruins  of  Paestum  or  Palmyra ;  to 
compare  it  with  them  as  a  proof  of  the  superiority  of  nature  over  art,  is  at  once  ill  judged 
and  unnecessary ;  that  superiority  is  a  truth  which  needs  no  such  demonstration.     The 
works  of  the  Creator  must  infinitely  excel  those  of  the  highest  of  his  creatures ;  but  there 
are  degrees  of  excellence  which  He  has  ordained ;  and  the  works  of  man,  considered  in 
their  proper  view,  as  resulting  frqm  the  exercise  and  development  of  faculties  imparted 
by  Him,  resolve  themselves  into  his  own,  and  serve  to  mark  the  gradations  of  that  scale 
which  connects  the  material  with  the  intellectual  world* 

Respecting 


Exterior  of  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa 


Entrance  to  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GRKAT    BRITAIN'.  39 

Respecting  the  original  formation  of  this  cave,  it  would  be  presumptuous,  in  a  work 
of  this  kind,  to  offer  any  hypothesis,  and  the  speculations  of  the  reader  on  this  subject 
may  be  better  aided  by  a  recurrence  to  the  general  account  of  Staffa,  given  in  the 
scientific  paper  already  quoted.  «  It  is  almost  superfluous  to  say,"  continues  Dr.  Mac 
Culloch,  "  that  the  whole  island  consists  of  a  mass  of  basalt.  I  have  indeed  been  told 
that  a  sand-stone  bed  has  been  seen  at  low  water  on  the  south-western  side,  but  I  had  not 
an  opportunity  of  observing  it.  This  is  the  part  of  the  island  where,  if  in  any  place,  it 
should,  from  the  inclination  of  the  strata,  be  perceived ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt 
the  assertion,  as  we  find  most  of  the  trap-rocks  of  the  western  islands  lying  on  beds  of 
sand-stone.  It  is  equally  superfluous  to  describe  the  basalt,  since  specimens  of  it  are  in 
every  one's  possession.  It  may  be  sufficient  to  remark,  that  its  texture  is  more  compact, 
more  crystalline,  and  less  earthy  than  that  of  basalt  in  general,  and  that  it  is  at  the  same 
time  less  homogeneous,  less  black,  more  fragile,  and  more  sonorous.  But  it  would  be 
idle  to  attempt  to  apply  different  terms  to  the  endless  varieties  of  the  rocks  of  this  tribe. 

"  This  basalt  exhibits  two  modifications,  the  columnar,  so  often  described,  and  the 
amorphous,  which  is  generally  more  or  less  amygdaloidal,  containing  imbedded  zeolites  of 
different  sorts.  I  saw  no  examples  of  basaltic  breccia,  or  trap  tuff,  as  it  is  improperly  called. 

"  It  is  in  the  amorphous  basalt  that  the  zeolites  are  most  abundant.  The  nodules 
vary  from  the  size  of  a  pea  to  that  of  an  hen's  egg  and  upwards,  and  generally  exhibit 
specimens  of  radiated  mesatype,  and  of  analcime.  The  cubical  zeolites  (chabasite)  are 
of  rare  occurrence,  and  never,  as  far  as  I  saw,  capillary.  The  lamillar  variety  of  stillbite 
is  occasionally  found  filling  the  intervals  of  approximate  columns.  I  did  not  observe  any 
zeolite  in  the  larger  and  more  perfect  columns,  but  in  the  smaller  and  more  regular  ones 
they  occur,  though  rarely. 

"  If  we  were  to  view  the  island  only  from  the  south-western  side,  and  at  half  tide,  we 
should  conclude  that  it  has  been  formed  of  three  distinct  deposits,  or  beds  of  basalt.  Of 
these  the  lowermost  appears  in  some  places  amorphous,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see  enough 
of  it  to  judge  whether  it  actually  forms  a  continuous  bed.  It  is  only  from  'the  analogy  of 
Canna,  and  the  other  basaltic  islands  of  this  sea,  that  we  should  be  tempted  to  generalize 
this  conclusion. 

"  The  next  bed  is  that  which  is  divided  into  those  large  columns  which  form  the 
most  conspicuous  feature  of  Staffa,  and  it  varies  from  thirty  to  fifty  feet  in  thickness. 
The  upper  one  appears  to  be  an  uniform  mass  of  amorphous  basalt,  but,  on  a,  nearer 
inspection,  it  is  found  to  consist  of  small  columns,  laid  and  entangled  in  every  possible 
direction,  often  horizontal,  and  generally  curved.  It  is  this  bed  which  forms  the  pon- 
derous cap  (as  it  is  called),  which  crowns  the  summit  of  the  grand  facade. 

"  Although  the  great  columnar  bed  occupies  but  a  small  portion  of  the  whole  exte- 
rior face  of  the  island,  the  columnar  form  is,  perhaps,  predominant  throughout  the  whole. 
Yet  it  would  be  equally  difficult  and  useless  to  attempt  to  determine  its  proportion  to  the 

amorphous 


40  VOYAGE    ROUND    GEEAT    BRITAIN. 

amorphous  part,  where  they  are  irregularly  mixed,  as  they  are  at  the  northern  and  eastern 
sides.  On  these  sides  also,  the  division  into  distinct  beds,  such  as  I  have  described  above, 
is  by  no  means  easy  to  trace,  and  possibly  it  does  not  exist. 

"  To  those  who  have  seen  the  beautifully  regular  columns  of  the  Giants'  Causeway, 
those  of  Staffa  will  appear  rude,  and  comparatively  shapeless.  They  nowhere  exhibit 
that  accuracy  of  design  which  is  so  conspicuous  in  the  former,  and  are  rarely  seen  of  any 
considerable  length  without  some  incurvation.  But  their  thickness  is  much  greater,  since, 
they  often  attain  a  diameter  of  four  feet.  They  vary  perpetually  in  the  number  of  their 
angles,  the  pentagonal  and  the  hexagonal  being  the  most  common,  and  those  of  an 
inferior  number  of  angles  being  less  common  than  those  of  a  superior.  Their  joints  are 
very  irregularly  placed,  and  are  frequently  wanting  through  a  considerable  length. 
When  separated,  the  touching  surfaces  are  either  flat,  or  marked  by  a  slight  respective 
concavity  and  convexity.  In  many  places,  and  most  conspicuously  in  the  great  cave, 
the  angles  of  the  upper  joint  are  considerably  and  obliquely  truncated  at  the  point  of 
contact  with  the  lower  one.  But  I  did  not  perceive  any  instance  where  a  corresponding 
projection  of  the  end  of  the  inferior  angle  rose  to  cover  the  truncation,  a  circumstance  of 
such  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Giants'  Causeway.  I  may  add,  that  the  articulated 
columns  are  most  remarkable  in  the  great  cave,  and  that  the  straightest  columns  generally 
exhibit  the  most  frequent  articulations." 

Dr.  Mac  Culloch  observes  that  the  drawings  of  this  cave,  which  have  been  en-, 
graved,  give  it  an  aspect  which  it  is  very  far  from  possessing.  That  in  Mr.  Pennant's 
tour,  to  which  no  draughtman's  name  is  annexed,  is  the  one  most  commonly  known,  and 
is  most  liable  to  this  objection.  Two.  very  large  engravings,  the  one  representing  the 
entrance,  the  other  the  interior  of  Fingal's  Cave,  from  drawings  by  M.  de  St.  Fond,  have 
been  published  at  Paris.  They  are  in  every  respect  inaccurate,  and  convey  a  very  fal- 
lacious idea  of  the  scenes  to  which  they  relate.  The  former  repeats  the  error  observable 
in  that  published  by  Mr.  Pennant,  of  representing  the  extremity  of  the  cave  as  distinctly 
visible  from  its  entrance.  The  errors  in  the  latter  are  equally  glaring ;  the  distant  islets, 
that  are  within  view  of  a  spectator  looking  from  the  cave,  are  represented  as  much  nearer 
than  they  are  in  reality,  being  about  three  leagues  distant.  This  remark  will  be  more 
clearly  understood  by  reference  to  the  view  here  given,  entitled,  VIEW  IN  FINGAL'S 
CAVE.  The  position  from  which  this  drawing  was  taken  seems  to  be  that  in  which  the, 
wonder  and  admiration  of  the  visitants  are  most  strongly  excited,  and  of  which  the  recol- 
lection is  present  to  their  minds  when  they  attempt  to  find  language  to  record  those 
feelings.  It  was  mentioned  by  one  of  the  boatmen,  that  the  shooting  parties,  whom 
curiosity  sometimes  induces  to  extend  their  excursions  to  this  spot,  occasionally  venture 
to  discharge  their  pieces  within  it.  The  effect  is  described  as  awfully  grand,  but  it  must 
be  attended  with  considerable  peril,  because  the  concussion  occasioned  by  such  an 
explosion  cannot  but  tend  to  loosen  some  of  the  ponderous  fragments  in  the  pendant 

roof, 


In  Fingal's  Cave,  Staffa 


Staffa,  near  Fingal's  Cave 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  41 

roof,  and  these,  if  detached,  might,  in  their  fall,  send  the  boat  and  its  crew  to  the  bottom. 
It  was  not  stated  that  any  accident  of  this  kind  ever  took  place. 

In  approaching  this  island  for  the  purpose  of  exploring  it,  great  caution  must  be 
used.  If  the  wind  be  westerly  there  must  evidently  be  danger  in  navigating  that  part  of 
the  coast  which  is  exposed  to  it,  on  account  of  the  heavy  swell,  and  the  precipitous  mass 
against  which  it  beats ;  the  same  apprehension  of  peril  is  to  be  entertained  with  regard  to 
the  east  coast  if  the  wind  blow  from  that  quarter;  in  either  case  advantage  must  be  taken 
of  the  leeward  side  of  the  isle.  It  is  to  be  observed  also  that  the  boats  which  usually 
offer  themselves  for  this  purpose  are  of  a  clumsy  construction,  and  ill  adapted  to  the 
precarious  navigation  of  these  seas  ;  the  boatmen  also  are  a  slow-minded,  heedless  race, 
by  no  means  alert  in  the  prevention  of  accidents,  confident  of  their  ability  in  the  last 
extreme  of  things  to  shift  for  themselves,  and  disposed  to  give  a  stranger  the  credit  of 
being  equally  sea-worthy.  Unmindful  of  the  sudden  gusts  and  squalls  which  occur  in 
the  most  promising  weather,  they  will  belay  their  sheet  whenever  they  can  invent  a 
pretext  for  doing  so,  unless  prevented  by  a  peremptory  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  their 
passenger.  When  such  remonstrance  is  of  no  avail,  it  is  incumbent  on  the  latter  to  have 
his  knife  ready  for  the  purpose  of  cutting  the  rope  instantly  in  case  of  emergency. 
Many  fatal  accidents,  and  one  of  very  recent  date,  have  occurred,  from  ignorance  or 
neglect  of  this  precaution. 

In  noticing  the  view  here  given,  entitled  STAFFA,  NEAR  FINGAI/S  CAVE,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  state  that  it  comprehends  part  of  the  south-west  face  of  the  isle,  with  that 
of  Mull  in  the  distance.  The  recess  observable  between  two  points  of  rock  is  the  en- 
trance to  Fingal's  Cave.  The  nearer  recess  is  that  called  the  Boat  Cave.  Of  the  position, 
form,  colour,  and  general  appearance  of  the  basaltic  masses,  as  beheld  in  this  point  of 
view,  an  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  accompanying  representation,  more  satisfactory 
than  any  which  could  be  conveyed  by  written  description.  These  masses  have  been 
denominated  columns,  on  account  of  their  form,  and  for  want  of  a  more  appropriate  term. 
They  do  not  stand  single  and  detached  so  as  to  admit  a  man's  arm  to  pass  round  them ; 
they  are  irregular  prisms  in  compact  masses,  having  their  contiguous  sides  of  correspondent 
dimensions,  like  those  of  the  cells  of  a  honeycomb. 

Respecting  the  formation  of  these  masses,  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  cite  the 
hypotheses  which  have  been  proposed,  without,  however,  presuming  to  decide  as  to  their 
merits,  or  to  enter  into  the  general  discussion  of  a  question  which  belongs  to  philosophers 
alone.  M.  Desmarets,  an  eminent  mineralogist,  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  first  who 
considered  basaltes  as  a  volcanic  production,  and  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  they  were 
produced  by  currents  of  volcanic  lava.  From  all  the  circumstances  which  he  had  ob- 
served in  the  course  of  an  extensive  tour,  he  concluded  that  basaltic  columns  were  formed 
by  the  gradual  refrigeration  of  a  mass  of  fluid  lava  during  its  slow  and  retarded  progress 
over  the  subjacent  soil.  In  the  year  1776,  Ferber  declared,  that  from  every  examination 

VOL.  in.  i  of 


42  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  volcanic  productions  in  which  he  had  been  engaged,  he  had  been  led  to  the  same  con- 
clusion. Mr.  Raspe,  in  the  same  year,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  prismatic  basaltes 
should  be  looked  upon  as  currents  of  lava,  cooled  in  sea-water,  or  cooled  of  themselves 
under  ground.  It  was  likewise  the  opinion  of  Buffon  that  Avhen  a  current  of  lava  arrived 
at  the  margin  of  the  sea,  the  water,  by  its  immensity,  by  the  resistance  of  its  cold,  and 
by  its  power  of  arresting  and  extinguishing  fire,  soon  consolidates  the  torrent  of  burning 
matter,  which  can  proceed  no  farther,  but  rises  up,  accumulates  new  strata,  and  forms 
a  perpendicular  wall.  Here  it  will  be  asked,  by  what  law  of  nature  could  this  consolida- 
tion of  a  river  of  liquid  fire  assume  the  characteristics  of  crystallization.  Aggregates  of 
basaltes  are  in  this  instance,  as  well  as  in  that  of  the  Giant's  Causeway,  and  many 
others,  found  near  the  sea,  but  they  occur  also  in  situations  at  a  remote  distance  from 
it,  where  such  a  process  of  refrigeration  could  not  take  place.  The  difficulty  arising 
from  this  consideration  has  been  disposed  of,  by  concluding  that  basaltic  prisms  have 
been  formed  by  lava,  or  a  matter  similar  to  it,  in  fusion  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and 
left  to  cool  slowly.  The  matter,  when  cooled  and  indurated,  is  supposed  to  have  con- 
tracted or  split  into  several  parts.  "  A  mass  of  lava,"  says  Dr.  Garnett,  "  in  the  interior 
parts  of  the  earth,  cooling  gradually,  contracts  and  forms  these  pillars ;  they  seem  to 
have  been  produced  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  prisms  of  starch,  to  which  they  bear  a 
strong  resemblance.  As  the  water  evaporates  or  escapes,  the  prisms  of  starch  are  formed 
by  the  contraction  of  the  mass ;  and  as  the  caloric  escapes  from  a  mass  of  fluid  lava, 
prisms  of  basaltes  are  produced."  This  author,  therefore,  deems  it  probable  that  the 
island  of  Staffa  is  a  small  relic  of  a  subterraneous  collection  of  pillars,  which  have  been 
laid  bare  by  the  violence  of  the  sea,  or  perhaps  by  some  of  the  adjacent  parts  giving  way. 
He  justifies  this  supposition  from  the  general  appearance  of  the  island,  which  is  that  of 
having  sloped  gradually  to  the  water's  edge,  until  the  disruption  of  its  sides  was  effected 
by  the  continual  beating  of  the  Atlantic.  The  pillars,  he  observes,  are  not  confined  to 
the  exterior  surface  of  the  island,  which  would  have  been  the  case  had  they  been  formed 
of  lava  cooled  by  flowing  into  the  sea;  they  extend  into  the  great  cave  as  far  as  it  has 
been  explored,  and  probably  the  whole  island  consists  of  them. 

It  will  now  be  necessary  to  interrupt  this  geological  disquisition  by  adverting  to  the 
view  here  given  of  THE  CORMORANT'S  CAVE,  so  called  from  the  birds  which  frequent  it 
in  great  numbers.  Their  characteristic  voracity  is  indicated  by  the  multitude  of  white 
patches  observable  on  the  rocks ;  these  are  so  many  heaps  of  ordure,  the  effluvia  of  which 
are  powerfully  repulsive,  and  act  as  a  guarantee  for  the  undisturbed  possession  of  this 
tenement  by  its  present  occupants.  Nauseous  and  disgusting  as  the  habits  of  these  cor- 
morants are,  they  are  exceeded  in  abomination  by  those  of  another  species  of  bird,  called, 
in  the  language  of  the  islanders,  the  fash-cutter.  There  is  something  so  whimsical  in  the 
mode  of  subsistence  pursued  by  this  freebooter  of  the  feathered  race,  that  a  short 
account  of  it,  on  the  testimony  of  actual  observers,  may  here  be  permitted.  The  fash- 
cutter 


The  Cormorants  Cave,  Staffa 


View  from  the  Island  of  Staffa 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  43 

cutter  is  feared  and  detested  by  the  gulls ;  he  subsists,  like  an  Arab  of  the  desert,  on 
plunder,  or  tribute,  which  he  extorts  from  them  by  terror.  Having  singled  out  a  victim 
on  the  wing,  he  pursues  him  incessantly  until  the  affrighted  bird  evacuates  the  digested 
residue  of  his  last  meal,  on  observing  which,  the  fash-cutter  makes  a  sudden  dart,  and 
intercepts  it  in  its  fall.  This  sport  he  continues  until  his  appetite  is  appeased,  after 
which  he  retires  to  his  solitary  haunts  until  the  calls  of  hunger  again  urge  him  to  the 
chase.  It  might  be  supposed  that  the  depositions  of  this  kind  of  food  on  the  rocks 
would  exempt  him  from  all  this  trouble  of  procuring  it,  but  he  appears  to  relish  it  only 
in  its  freshest  state,  and  is  epicure  enough  to  prefer  a  hot  dinner  to  a  cold  one.  The 
singularity  of  this  fact  occasioned  some  enquiry  as  to  its  credibility,  which  was  repeatedly 
vouched  for.  The  bird  in  question  is  occasionally  though  rarely  met  with  in  other  parts 
of  the  coast ;  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  it  is  denominated  by  an  English  epithet  too  plainly 
expressive  of  its  peculiar  habits. 

The  general  aspect  of  the  western  coast  of  Staffa,  on  which  the  Cormorant's  Cave  is 
situated,  is  represented  in  the  view  above  mentioned.  To  the  northward  it  is  compara- 
tively low ;  the  ranges  of  basaltes  are  observed  to  be  of  greater  magnitude  in  proportion 
to  their  proximity  to  the  southern  end,  which  is  the  highest,  and  presents  the  most  mag- 
nificent mass  of  columns.  It  is  to  this  quarter  that  Dr.  Mac  Culloch  alludes,  in  noticing 
a  fact  of  considerable  importance  in  the  natural  history  of  Staffa  which  had  before  escaped 
the  notice  of  visitors.  This  is  the  occurrence  of  a  bed  of  alluvial  matter  on  some  parts 
of  its  surface,  containing  fragments  of  the  elder  rocks.  It  is  most  easily  seen  on  that  side 
which  faces  lona,  and  on  the  summit  of  the  cliffs  of  a  semicircular  bay,  opening  in  that 
direction.  The  bed  is  here  broken  at  the  edge  of  a  cliff  so  as  to  expose  its  whole  thick- 
ness to  a  considerable  extent.  But  the  same  appearance  may  also  be  observed  imme- 
diately above  the  ordinary  landing-place,  where  the  bed  has  also  been  broken.  The 
stones  which  it  contains  are  all  rounded,  and  of  various,  often  considerable  dimensions, 
and  they  exhibit  specimens  of  granite,  gneiss,  micaceous  schistus,  quartz,  and  red  sand- 
stone. Together  with  these  are  some  rolled  pieces  of  basalt. 

"  Here  then,"  continues  he,  "  is  a  circumstance  in  the  mineral  history  of  Staffa,  ad- 
ventitious it  is  true,  but  involving  difficulties  of  no  small  importance.  If  we  cast  our 
eyes  on  the  map,  we  shall  perceive  that  it  is  embayed  in  a  large  sinuosity  formed  in  the 
island  of  Mull,  and  nearly  inclosed  on  the  opposite  side  by  lona  and  the  Treshanish 
islands.  Beyond  the  latter,  a  second  line  is  drawn  by  Tiree  and  Coll;  while,  to  the 
north,  but  at  a  greater  distance,  are  placed  the  islands  of  Muck,  Rum,  Egg,  Canna,  and 
Skye.  The  whole  island  of  Mull,  with  the  exception  of  the  Ross,  is  of  a  trap  formation,  con- 
taining, however,  some  partial  tracts  of  sandstone  and  other  rocks  which  I  need  not  notice. 
The  islands  of  Ulva,  and  the  Treshanish,  with  their  dependant  rocks,  are  also  of  the  trap 
formation.  So  are  the  islands  which  lie  to  the  north,  and  which  are  enumerated  above, 
lona,  however,  together  with  Coll  and  Tiree,  consist  principally  of  gneiss  and  mica  slate 

traversed 


44  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

traversed  by  granite  veins,  rocks  which  also  form  the  chief  parts  of  the  coasts  of  Lorn, 
Appin,  Morven,  and  Ardnamurchan. 

"  It  is  to  the  former  then  that  we  must  look  for  the  origin  of  the  rolled  stones  which 
cover  Staffa,  if,  limiting  the  great  operations  of  nature  by  our  own  narrow  views,  and  the 
ages  which  have  contributed  to  change  the  face  of  the  globe  by  our  own  short  span,  we 
are  led  to  seek  for  that  solution  which  may  appear  the  least  difficult.  Even  then  we 
must  admit  that  Staft'a  has  formed  part  of  one  continuous  land  with  the  islands  of  Coll, 
Tiree,  and  Mull,  since  no  transportation  could  have  been  effected  without  the  existence 
of  a  continuous  acclivity  between  them. 

"  The  language  which  this  circumstance  speaks  is  not  obscure,  and  the  nature  of 
these  changes  allows  of  little  dispute.  If  we  admit  this  obliteration  of  so  large  a  portion 
of  solid  land,  and  consider  that  a  deep  sea  noxv  rolls  above  the  foundations  of  former 
mountains,  we  have  no  farther  difficulty  to  obstruct  us  in  accounting  for  the  numerous 
and  distant  accumulations  of  transported  materials  which  occur  over  the  whole  surface 
of  the  earth.  The  same  power,  whatever  it  was,  which  hollowed  the  great  sinuosity  of 
Mull,  might  well  remove  the  solid  matter  that  once  filled  the  valleys  which  now  separate 
Mont  Blanc  from  the  ridge  of  Jura. 

"  But  if,  appalled  at  the  supposed  magnitude  of  those  changes,  and  of  the  period  of 
time  which  must  have  elapsed  to  complete  them,  we  suppose  that  the  island  of  Staffa  was 
elevated  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea  in  its  present  detached  form,  and  retaining  in  its 
summit  a  portion  of  the  bed  of  loose  matter  deposited  under  the  present  water,  another 
order  of  phenomena  crowds  upon  us,  no  less  important,  and  involving  circumstances  almost 
equally  repugnant  to  the  visible  operations  of  nature. 

"  These  appearances  are  perhaps  insufficient  to  enable  us  to  decide  between  two  dif- 
ficulties of  equal  magnitude,  nor  is  it  here  necessary  to  enter  further  on  that  question. 
I  may  also  leave  it  to  those  who  have  engaged  more  deeply  in  such  investigations  to  de- 
termine, whether,  in  the  supposition  of  the  first  of  these  causes,  the  wasting  of  the  land 
has  arisen  from  the  gradual  action  of  natural  operations,  or  the  more  violent  efforts  of  an 
occasional  destroying  force.  It  is  my  humble  task  to  point  out  a  fact,  as  a  contribution 
to  that  mass  of  accumulating  information  on  which  a  consolidated  fabric  may  at  some 
future  time  be  erected.  Yet  the  idle  spectator  or  enthusiastic  lover  of  nature,  who  shall 
hereafter  view  this  interesting  spot,  may,  when  he  contemplates  these  grand  revolutions, 
learn  to  wonder  less  at  the  efforts  of  that  power  which  has  hollowed  the  cave  of  Fingal, 
and  submerged  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean  those  columns  which  seemed  destined  for 
eternity." 

Having  landed,  and  ascended  to  the  top  of  the  island,  a  more  general  and  compre- 
hensive prospect  was  obtained.  The  annexed  VIEW  FROM  THE  ISLAND  OF  STAFFA  in- 
cludes the  islets  of  I'ladda,  Lunga,  and  Bachk,  or  the  Dutchman's  Cap.  The  latter 
derives  its  name  from  its  resemblance  in  form  to  a  broad-brimmed  hat  with  a  very 

low 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  45 

low  crown.  They  belong  to  the  group  called  the  Treshanish  Isles,  and  terminate  the 
north-western  horn  of  the  bay  in  which  Staffa  is  situated.  Diminutive  in  extent,  remote 
in  situation,  and  destitute  of  curiosities  natural  or  artificial,  they  offer  no  attraction  to 
the  visits  of  a  stranger,  and  are  interesting  only  to  those  who  have  a  claim  on  their  scanty 
produce.  Beyond  them  are  the  islands  of  Tirey  and  Coll,  extending  from  north-east  to 
south-west.  The  island  of  Coll,  the  more  northern,  is  about  thirteen  miles  in  length,  and 
three  in  breadth.  The  shores  are  rocky,  and  in  many  places  precipitous,  and  the  surface 
of  the  interior  is  diversified  by  craggy  but  inconsiderable  eminences  all  over  its  extent, 
interspersed  with  springs,  small  lakes,  and  narrow  streams.  The  greater  part  of  the  isle 
is  covered  with  heath,  varied  occasionally  with  fields  of  corn  and  green  grasses :  there 
are  no  trees.  Mr.  M'Lean,  of  Coll,  is  the  proprietor  of  the  whole  territory,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  portions  at  its  two  extremities,  which  belong  to  the  Duke  of  Argyle;  The 
inhabitants  considerably  exceed  a  thousand.  Black  cattle  are  the  favourite  live  stock 
for  farming,  the  moisture  of  the  soil  and  climate  being  unfavourable  to  the  breeding  of 
sheep.  The  horses  are  numerous.  Of  birds  there  are  several  kinds,  such  as  geese,  swans, 
rails,  and  plovers.  At  the  east  end  multitudes  of  rabbits  burrow  in  the  sand :  a  couple 
of  hares  were  introduced  about  twenty  years  ago,  and  the  breed  has  increased  in  a  great 
degree.  The  adjacent  fishing  banks  are  frequented  chiefly  by  fishers  from  other  districts, 
the  people  of  Coll  having  neglected,  through  want  of  success,  to  cultivate  this  branch  of 
industry. 

The  island  of  Tiree,  south-west  of  Coll,  is  about  eleven  miles  long,  and  two  and  a 
half  broad.  Its  coast  is  in  general  rocky,  and  intersected  by  spacious  sandy  bays.  The 
interior  is  interspersed  with  low  rocks  and  rising  grounds,  none  of  them  more  than  250 
feet  above  the  sea-level ;  but  the  general  surface  is  so  flat  that  the  ancient  name  of  the 
isle  was  Riog-Hachd-bar-Fathuia,  "  the  kingdom  whose  summits  are  lower  than  the 
waves."  So  low,  in  fact,  is  the  land  generally,  that  the  waves  are  often  seen  from  one 
shore  apparently  rising  several  feet  above  the  level  of  the  other.  Near  the  centre  is  a 
plain  containing  about  1200  Scottish  acres,  with  a  sandy  bottom,  mostly  covered  with 
black  earth  to  the  depth  of  ten  inches :  a  fine  verdant  expanse,  variegated  with  flowers. 
Considerable  additions  have  been  made  to  it  on  the  side  next  the  shore. 

The  Ceamn-harra,  the  west  point  of  Tiree,  is  remarkable  for  a  great  number  of  large 
natural  caves,  frequented,  in  time  of  hatching,  by  multitudinous  flocks  of  sea-fowl.  Their 
harsh  notes,  mingled  with  the  bellowing  of  the  sea,  form  a  discordant  combination  of 
sound  well  suited  to  the  hideousness  of  the  scene.  In  other  lofty  caves  the  raven,  the 
hawk,  or  the  eagle,  build  their  nests;  and,  separate  from  all  these,  the  pigeons  have  chosen 
their  habitations.  Numbers  of  them  are  caught  by  the  islanders,  who  descend  the  rocks 
by  a  very  precarious  path,  carrying  with  them  a  light,  and  a  bundle  of  straw,  to  which 
they  set  fire.  The  pigeons,  dislodged  by  the  smoke,  fly  into  the  flames,  apparently 
dazzled  by  their  light,  and  are  thus  taken. 

VOL.  in.  K  On 


46  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

On  the  rocks  round  the  coasts  of  Tiree  and  Coll  are  the  remains  of  a  considerable 
number  of  those  ancient  buildings  called  Duns.  They  are  in  sight  of  each  other,  and 
are  of  uniform  structure,  having  an  inner  and  an  outer  wall,  without  any  appearance  of 
lime  or  other  cement.  The  inner  wall  is  always  circular ;  but  the  outer  sometimes  varies 
in  its  outline,  according  to  the  surface  of  rock  on  which  it  stands.  On  a  very  rugged 
declivity,  at  the  above-mentioned  point  of  Ceamn-harra,  is  St.  Patrick's  Temple,  situated 
in  a  space  of  about  one-third  of  an  acre,  enclosed  by  the  vestige  of  a  wall.  It  is  twenty- 
six  feet  by  eleven  within  the  walls;  the  side  walls  are  five  feet  and  a  half  high:  it  is 
without  a  roof,  and  is  rudely  constructed  of  stone  and  lime.  At  the  east  end  are  the 
remains  of  a  square  altar  and  a  cross.  On  the  top  of  a  rock,  at  the  distance  of  sixty 
yards,  is  a  hollow,  two  feet  in  diameter,  and  four  deep,  called  by  the  country  people  St. 
Patrick's  vat.  British,  Danish,  and  other  coins  have  been  found  buried  in  Tiree,  as  also 
skeletons  of  men  and  horses,  shields,  helmets,  spears,  swords,  and  other  arms. 

The  weather  during  this  visit  to  Staffa  was  uniformly  favourable,  and  therefore  no 
opportunity  was  afforded  of  witnessing  those  sublime  effects  produced  by  the  rolling  of 
an  agitated  sea  among  the  rocks  and  caverns.  The  concussion  produced  on  the  island 
by  a  storm  is  said  to  be  so  alarming  as  to  deter  any  persons  from  settling  on  it.  A  poor 
family,  it  is  said,  resided  here  for  three  years  in  succession;  during  the  winter  season  the 
waves  sometimes  beat  so  violently  as  to  shake  their  very  house,  though  situated  in  the 
midst  of  the  isle,  and  the  pot  which  hung  over  their  fire  was  seen  to  vibrate.  In  the  tour 
of  M.  Faujas  de  St.  Fond,  it  is  stated  that  two  of  his  companions  were  obliged  by  stress 
of  weather  to  remain  two  nights  on  Staffa,  in  the  hut  above  mentioned,  which  was  shaken 
to  its  foundation  by  the  rushing  of  the  waves  against  the  island  and  into  the  extensive 
caves  which  penetrate  its  interior.  This  concussion,  and  the  thundering  roar  occasioned 
by  it,  utterly  deprived  them  of  sleep.  The  sensations  of  terror  thus  produced  would  no 
doubt  be  heightened  by  reflection  on  that  mighty  convulsion  of  nature  to  which  Staffa  is 
by  some  supposed  to  owe  its  present  form  and  appearance;  and  the  recollection  of  its 
abrupt  masses  of  basalt,  its  confused  heaps  of  bending  pillars,  its  vast  cavities,  and  all 
those  signs  which  characterize  it  as  the  mere  fragment  of  a  mighty  ruin,  would  suggest 
the  possibility  of  a  similar  visitation.  To  have  experienced  the  effects  of  a  storm  on  such 
a  spot  would  have  augmented  the  interest  of  the  description,  but  the  reader  will  readily 
believe  that  the  absence  of  such  an  event  was  no  source  either  of  disappointment  or 
regret. 

The  general  view  here  given,  entitled  THE  ISLAND  OF  STAFFA  FROM  THE  EAST, 
represents  its  aspect  and  characteristic  features  as  seen  on  the  approach  to  it  in  that 
direction.  The  ranges  of  its  basaltic  prisms  beheld  at  this  distance,  have  an  appearance 
of  much  greater  regularity  than  they  are  found  to  possess  on  a  nearer  examination.  It 
has  already  been  observed  that  they  vary  perpetually  in  the  number  of  their  angles,  and 
that  the  pentagonal  and  the  hexagonal  are  the  most  common.  Respecting  the  octagonal, 

M.  de 


The  Island  of  Staffa  from  the  East 


The  Island  of  Staffa,  from  the  South  West 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  4? 

M.  de  St  Fond  remarks  that  they  are  found  of  very  large  size,  sometimes  four  feet  in 
diameter,  exhibiting  in  their  truncature  the  elements  of  other  smaller  prisms.  The  same 
writer  enumerates,  among  its  mineralogical  productions,  white  radiated  zeolites  incrusted 
with  basaltic  lava,  much  softened,  in  round  pieces,  oval  or  irregular,  and  in  diverging 
points.  There  are  sometimes  seen  on  the  exterior  part  of  these  oval  pieces  projecting 
crystals  of  cubical  zeolites.  He  states  that  he  obtained,  from  one  of  the  beds  of  muddy 
lava  on  which  the  greater  part  of  the  prisms  of  Staffa  repose,  several  spherical  nuclei  of 
zeolites  in  diverging  rays,  united,  to  the  number  of  three  or  four  in  one  group.  Some  of 
these  small  balls  were  about  the  size  of  a  gall-nut,  the  one  half  of  which  was  penetrated 
by  a  calcedinous  milky  juice,  and  the  other  by  a  quartzose  juice  extremely  crystalline, 
and  transparent  as  the  purest  rock-crystal.  He  found  also  cubical  white  zeolites,  and 
one  group  of  these  crystals  of  a  greenish  cast,  which  were  transparent.  This  specimen 
was  found  in  the  interior  of  Fingal's  Cave,  in  a  crevice  occasioned  by  the  separation  of 
two  prisms.  He  concludes  that  it  had  been  formed  in  that  fissure,  in  a  very  slow  and 
gradual  manner,  by  the  juxta-position  of  zeolitic  particles  held  in  solution  by  the  aqueous 
fluid.  The  greenish  colour  he  attributes  to  the  decomposition  of  the  iron  contained  in 
the  basaltes.  Respecting  the  rounded  stones  of  granite  found  upon  the  beach,  he  ob- 
serves that  it  is  of  the  same  texture  with  that  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  granite.  Adhering 
to  the  hypothesis  that  Staffa  and  its  neighbouring  isles  are  volcanic,  he  accounts  for  the 
presence  of  these  stones  by  supposing  that  they  have  been  transported  hither  from  a 
distance  by  currents. 

It  is  singular  to  remark  that  this  island,  though  one  of  the  greatest  curiosities  in 
nature,  should  have  remained,  until  within  the  last  half  century,  almost  unknown.  Pen- 
nant deduces  its  name  from  a  term  in  the  Norwegian  language  signifying  a  staff  or  prop, 
and  figuratively,  a  column.  Its  principal  cave  has  been  distinguished,  amidst  the  ob- 
scurity of  Hebridean  tradition,  by  its  association  with  the  memory  of  Fingal,  but  no 
particular  circumstances  have  been  adduced  to  connect  its  history  with  that  of  the  hero 
whose  name  it  bears.  It  is  not  known  to  have  been  explored  by  the  torch  of  science 
until  the  year  1772,  when  it  was  visited  by  Mr.  Leach,  a  native  of  Ireland,  at  whose  in- 
stance Sir  Joseph  Banks,  then  on  his  way  to  Iceland,  was  induced  to  examine  it.  His 
description,  as  published  by  Mr.  Pennant,  seems  to  have  stimulated  the  subsequent  re- 
searches by  which  this  interesting  subject  has  been  illustrated,  and  by  the  aid  of  which 
the  present  account,  which  might  have  been  too  brief  and  general,  if  confined  to  a  mere 
record  of  an  individual's  observation,  has  been  augmented  and  extended. 

In  the  view  last  adverted  to,  the  island  is  represented  as  seen  in  that  direction  by 
which  it  is  usually  approached.  In  the  succeeding  view  entitled  STAFFA  FROM  THE 
SOUTH-WEST,  it  is  exhibited  under  another  aspect,  no  less  interesting  when  contemplated 
with  reference  to  the  finely  appropriate  allusion  in  Mr.  Walter  Scott's  poem  of  "  The 

K  2  Lord 


48  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Lord  of  the  Isles,"  which  is  introduced  in  describing  the  voyage  of  the  chieftains  from 
Skye. 

"  The  shores  of  Mull  on  the  eastward  lay, 
And  Ulva  dark  and  Colonsay, 
And  all  the  group  of  islets  gay 

That  guard  famed  Staffa  round. 
Then  all  unknown  its  columns  rose, 
Where  dark  and  undisturbed  repose 

The  cormorant  had  found ; 
And  the  shy  seal  had  quiet  home, 
And  weltered  in  that  wond'rous  dome 
Where,  as  to  shame  the  temples  deck'd 
By  skill  of  earthly  architect, 
Nature  herself,  it  seem'd,  would  raise 
A  minster  to  her  Maker's  praise  ! 
Not  for  a  meaner  use  ascend 
Her  columns,  or  her  arches  bend ; 
Nor  of  a  theme  less  solemn  tells 
That  mighty  surge  that  ebbs  and  swells, 
And  still,  between  each  awful  pause, 
From  the  high  vault  an  answer  draws 
In  varied  tone  prolonged  and  high 
That  mocks  the  organ's  melody. 
Nor  doth  its  entrance  front  in  vain 
To  old  lona's  holy  fane, 
That  Nature's  voice  might  seem  to  say, 
'  Well  hast  thou  done,  frail  child  of  clay ! 
Thy  humble  powers  that  stately  shrine 
Task'd  high  and  hard — but  witness  mine  !'  " 

"With  this  picturesque  and  poetical  survey  of  these  scenes,  glancing,  as  it  does,  on  the 
object  which  conies  next  under  consideration,  it  may  be  proper  to  pronounce  a  valedic- 
tion on  Staffa,  and  to  pursue  the  voyage.  At  the  distance  of  about  three  leagues  from 
it,  and  near  the  southern  termination  of  the  great  bay  formed  by  the  western  side  of  the 
island  of  Mull,  stands  the  sacred  isle  above  alluded  to.  It  is  known  under  three  names, 
li,  pronounced  Ee,  lona,  and  I-columb-kill.  The  name  lona  is  now  confined  to  the 
language  of  poetry,  and  has  fallen  into  disuse  as  a  common  appellation,  and  the  island  is 
generally  designated  by  the  simple  name  of  li,  or  the  more  distinctive  one  of  I-columb- 
kill.  Various  evidences  have  been  adduced  to  prove  that  this  spot  was  possessed  by  the 
Druids  before  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  A  green  eminence  close  to  the  sound 
still  retains  the  traditionary  name  of  the  Druids'  burial-place,  and  bones  have  been  ac- 
cidentally dug  up  near  the  spot,  which  by  natural  inference  seemed  to  confirm  the  tradi- 
tion, as  being  no  other  than  the  relics  of  the  Druids.  The  first  Christians  are  said  to 

have 


VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  49 

have  expelled  these  original  possessors,  and  to  have  superseded  their  barbarous  and 
superstitious  rites,  by  the  institutions  of  their  own  religion.  It  is  far  from  improbable 
that  a  spot  which  paganism  held  sacred  should  have  been  selected  to  commemorate  the 
triumph  of  that  faith  which  overthrew  it,  and  should  have  retained  under  a  new  order  of 
things  the  reputation  of  its  former  sanctity. 

The  term  li  simply  signifies  an  island  ;  I-columb-kill  is  explained  as  meaning  the 
island  of  the  cell  of  Columba.  This  remarkable  man,  according  to  Bede,  came  to  Britain 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  northern  Picts  in  the  year  565,  in  the  reign  of  Eugene  III., 
and  having  partly  succeeded  in  his  object,  the  Picts  granted  him  this  island.  On  ob- 
taining possession  of  it  he  founded  a  kind  of  monastery,  taking,  it  is  supposed,  for  the 
model  of  his  institution  one  of  the  oriental  monastic  orders.  It  is  said  that  the  original 
members  of  the  fraternity  were  canons  regular,  of  whom  the  founder  was  the  first  abbot ; 
and  that  until  the  year  7 16  these  monks  differed  from  those  of  the  church  of  Rome,  both 
in  the  observance  of  Easter,  and  in  the  clerical  tonsure.  The  first  Christian  clergy  of 
Scotland,  it  may  be  remarked,  were  denominated  Culdees.  They  were  monks,  and  their 
monasteries  were  seminaries  from  whence  they  sent  out  bishops  and  priests  to  reside  in 
different  districts.  The  missionaries  thus  appointed  by  them  appear  to  have  pursued  a 
secluded  mode  of  life,  and  their  residence  was  denominated  a  cuil,  kill,  or  cell ;  this  cir- 
cumstance serves  to  account  for  the  frequent  occurrence  of  the  syllable  kill,  in  the  names 
of  Scottish  parishes,  particularly  those  of  the  western  counties.  At  a  subsequent  period 
the  Culdees  were  prevailed  on  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  the  see  of  Rome,  and  thus 
participated  in  the  advantages  accruing  to  the  members  of  that  ecclesiastical  hierarchy. 

Columba  is  said  to  have  led  a  life  of  very  strict  and  severe  sanctity  in  lona.  For 
several  years  after  his  first  settlement  there,  he  would  not  suffer  any  females  to  reside  on 
the  island,  and  so  great  was  his  caution  against  the  temptations  of  the  fair  sex,  that  he 
even  prohibited  cattle  on  their  account,  and  would  not  permit  a  cow  to  be  kept  near  his 
sanctuary,  because,  according  to  his  syllogistic  adage,  "  where  there  is  a  cow  there  must 
be  a  woman,  and  where  there  is  a  woman  there  must  be  mischief."  From  this  far-sighted 
stretch  of  policy,  whether  resulting  from  the  experience  of  his  early  life  in  Ireland,  or 
from  observation  of  the  characters  and  dispositions  of  his  followers,  we  may  judge  of  the 
general  tenour  of  his  regulations  for  preserving  them  from  the  snares  of  the  world.  The 
fame  of  his  sanctity,  in  so  remote  an  age,  would  necessarily  be  corroborated  by  the  im- 
putation of  miraculous  power,  and  accordingly  it  is  reported  of  him  that  when  he  went 
to  the  court  of  the  Pictish  king  Bradeus,  with  the  design  of  converting  him  to  Chris- 
tianity, he  was  refused  an  audience  by  that  prince,  who  ordered  the  gates  of  his  palace 
to  be  shut  against  him,  when  the  saint,  by  the  power  of  his  word,  instantly  caused  them 
to  fly  open  ;  this  miracle  sufficed  for  the  conversion  of  Bradeus,  who  testified  his  venera- 
tion of  Columba  by  conferring  on  him  the  island  where  he  founded  his  monastery.  There 
is  something  rather  whimsical  in  the  history  of  another  miracle  which  is  recorded  of  him. 

One 


50  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

One  of  the  first  edifices  begun  on  the  island  was  the  chapel  of  Oran,  so  called  in  honour 
of  his  friend  and  associate.  The  progress  of  the  building  was  frustrated  by  the  machina- 
tions of  an  evil  spirit,  by  means  of  which  the  walls  were  overthrown  as  fast  as  they  were 
erected.  Columba  in  this  emergency  betook  himself  to  prayer  in  a  remote  part  of  the 
island,  and  it  was  revealed  to  him,  that  until  a  human  victim  was  interred  alive,  the 
building  would  not  be  completed.  Oran  magnanimously  devoted  himself  for  this 
sacrifice,  and  the  sepulture  was  consequently  performed.  When  he  had  been  entombed 
three  days,  Columba,  desirous  of  taking  a  last  look  of  his  friend,  ordered  the  earth  and 
stones  which  covered  his  sepulchre  to  be  removed,  when,  to  the  astonishment  of  all 
present,  Oran  started  up  and  began  to  reveal  "  the  secrets  of  his  prison-house,"  declaring, 
among  other  strange  things,  that  hell  was  a  mere  fiction  of  priestcraft,  having  no  real 
existence.  This  profane  asseveration  was  interrupted  by  Columba,  who  ordered  the 
earth  to  be  thrown  in  again,  and  Oran  was  finally  enclosed  in  his  tomb. 

After  the  death  of  Columba,  which  took  place  in  the  seventy-seventh  year  of  his 
age,  the  religious  establishments  founded  by  him  continued  in  the  unmolested  exercise  of 
their  functions  during  two  centuries.  In  the  year  807  the  Danes  invaded  the  island,  and 
with  their  accustomed  barbarity  slew  some  of  the  monks,  compelling  the  others,  with 
Collach  their  abbot,  to  seek  safety  by  flight.  The  monastery  remained  in  a  state  of  de- 
population for  several  years ;  but  on  the  retreat  of  the  Danes  it  became  the  abode  of  a 
new  order,  the  Cluniacs,  who  held  it  until  the  general  dissolution  of  monastic  institutions, 
when  the  revenues  were  united  to  the  see  of  Argyle,  and  on  the  abolition  of  episcopacy, 
became  the  property  of  the  duke. 

The  vestiges  of  these  institutions  impart  a  venerable  character  to  the  present  aspect 
of  the  island,  of  which  some  idea  may  be  conceived,  on  reference  to  the  annexed  VIEW 
OF  IONA  FROM  THE  NORTH-EAST.  The  cathedral  and  the  other  religious  edifices,  in 
a  dilapidated  state,  constitute  an  extensive  range  of  ruins.  The  interest  they  excite 
becomes  more  profound  when  we  reflect  on  the  high  estimation  in  which  this  sacred  spot 
was  held  in  ancient  times.  Within  its  precincts  are  interred  the  remains  of  forty-eight 
Scottish  kings,  four  kings  of  Ireland,  eight  Norwegian  sovereigns,  and  one  king  of  France. 
This  is  the  holy  ground  alluded  to  in  Shakspeare's  tragedy  of  Macbeth,  as  assigned  for 
the  sepulture  of  Duncan's  body, 

"  carried  to  CohneVkill, 
The  sacred  store-house  of  his  ancestors 
And  guardian  of  their  bones." 

At  a  respectful  distance  from  these  graves  of  buried  majesty,  and  within  the  same 
sanctuary,  are  interred  most  of  the  Lords  of  the  Isles.  The  tombstones  are  numerous, 
but  few  of  them  retain  any  legible  characters.  Pious  but  ineffectual  homage!  which 
would  preserve  even  after  death  some  semblance  of  the  gradations  of  human  grandeur. 
The  earthworm  consumes  indiscriminately  the  chieftain  and  his  vassal ;  time  and  vicissi- 
tude 


View  of  lona,  from  the  N.  East 


The  Cathedral  at  lona 


VOVAGF.  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  51 

tude  obliterate  the  memorials  which  distinguish  them,  and  reduce  the  exterior  of  their 
tombs  to  the  same  ruin  and  decay  which  had  long  existed  within  them.  The  preference 
given  to  lona  as  a  place  of  royal  sepulture  may  be  accounted  for  generally  by  its  early 
reputation  for  sanctity ;  and  a  particular  reason  has  been  assigned  which  accords  with 
and  strengthens  this  opinion.  There  existed  an  ancient  prophecy  in  Erse,  importing  that 
this  privileged  place  should  be  exempted  from  a  deluge  destined,  ere  the  consummation 
of  all  things,  to  overwhelm  the  territories  in  its  vicinity.  The  following  has  been  given  as 
a  paraphrase  of  that  prophecy  : 

Seven  years  before  that  awful  day 

When  time  shall  be  no  more, 
A  watery  deluge  will  o'ersweep 

Hibernians  mossy  shore ; 
The  green-clad  Isla  too  shall  sink, 

While  with  the  great  and  good, 
Columba's  happy  isle  will  rear 

Her  towers  above  the  flood. 

They,  who,  confiding  in  the  verification  of  such  a  prophecy,  coveted  the  distinction  of 
being  interred  in  this  sanctuary,  would  have  lent  an  unwilling  ear  to  one  which  should 
have  foretold  its  present  desolation  and  abandonment.  And  yet  St.  Columba  is  said  by 
the  natives  to  have  actually  predicted  that  his  retreat  would  undergo  this  visitation,  but 
this  prediction  was  accompanied  with  an  assurance  that  better  ages  would  succeed,  in 
which  it  was  to  recover  all  its  former  splendour  and  renown. 

It  is  mentioned  as  a  singular  fact  in  ecclesiastical  history,  that  the  abbots  of  I-columb- 
kill  held  jurisdiction  not  only  over  all  the  monasteries  that  were  affiliated  with  this,  but 
over  all  the  monks  of  this  abbey  who  exercised  the  function  of  priest  or  even  of  bishop 
in  other  places.  Bede,  observes  Mr.  Pennant,  speaks  of  this  singular  pre-eminence,  and 
says  that  the  island  always  had  for  a  governor  an  abbot  presbyter,  to  whose  power,  by  a 
very  uncommon  rule,  not  only  every  province,  but  even  the  bishops  themselves  yielded 
obedience.  From  this  account  the  enemies  to  episcopacy  have  inferred  that  the  rank  of 
bishop  was  a  novelty,  introduced  into  the  church  in  corrupt  times,  and  that  the  authority 
assumed  by  them  was  a  manifest  usurpation,  since  a  simple  abbot,  for  a  space  of  time 
so  considerable,  was  permitted  to  have  the  superiority.  In  answer  to  this,  Archbishop 
Usher,  in  his  work  on  the  origin  of  British  churches,  alleges,  that  the  power  of  the 
abbot  of  lona  was  only  local,  and  extended  merely  to  the  bishop  who  resided  there ;  for, 
after  the  conquest  of  the  isle  of  Man  by  the  English,  and  the  division  of  the  see  after  that 
event,  the  bishop  of  the  Isles  transferred  his  residence  from  Man  to  lona.  Notwith- 
standing this,  continues  Mr.  Pennant,  the  authority  of  the  venerable  Bede  seems  to  be 
stronger  than  that  of  the  Ulster  annals,  quoted  by  the  archbishop,  which  go  no  farther 
than  to  state  that  a  bishop  had  always  resided  in  lona,  and  contain  no  attempt  to  refute 

the 


52  VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

the  positive  assertion  of  the  historian.  The  probable  state  of  the  case  seems  to  be  that 
lona  was  the  principal  seminary  of  the  Culdees,  which  educated  priests  and  bishops  and 
appointed  them  to  various  places,  and  that  thus,  its  superior,  or  abbot,  though  himself 
only  a  priest  or  presbyter,  had  a  very  extensive  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.  On  the  union 
of  this  establishment  to  the  see  of  Rome,  the  pope  might  in  the  first  instance  have  been 
satisfied  with  a  nominal  subjection,  conceding  to  the  abbots  of  I-columb-kill  the  eccle- 
siastical patronage  which  they  previously  enjoyed,  and  in  consequence  of  this  particular 
concession,  a  simple  presbyter  might  exercise  jurisdiction  over  a  prelate. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  bishops  of  the  Isles  formerly  had  their  cathedral  in  the 
Isle  of  Man.  On  the  acquisition  of  that  isle  by  the  English,  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I., 
the  abbots  of  I-columb-kill  allowed  these  bishops  the  use  of  their  church.  These  prelates, 
who,  before  this  event,  were  styled  bishops  of  Sodor  and  Man,  were  afterwards  entitled 
Bishops  of  the  Isles,  and  the  former  title  was  assumed  by  the  bishops  of  Man.  Sodor 
was  erroneously  supposed  to  be  an  imaginary  town  either  in  Man  or  lona,  until  Dr.  Mac- 
pherson  explained  its  true  import.  He  observes  that  during  the  time  Avhen  the  Norwe- 
gians, and  after  them  the  Macdonalds,  possessed  the  isles,  those  parts  of  their  dominions 
situated  north  of  the  point  of  Ardnamurchan  were  denominated  Nordereys,  signifying  the 
northward  isles,  those  situated  south  of  that  point  were  called  Sudereys,  the  southward 
isles.  The  latter  being  the  more  important  division  gave  the  title  of  the  bishopric,  which 
after  the  separation  above  alluded  to  was  retained  by  the  bishops  of  Man  as  a  title  of 
courtesy. 

The  most  conspicuous  object  in  the  ruins  is  the  tower  of  the  cathedral.  It  is  of  three 
stories,  and  is  supported  by  four  arches,  adorned  with  figures  in  basso  relievo.  These 
arches  rest  on  pillars  about  ten  feet  high  and  eight  and  a  half  in  circumference,  on  the 
capitals  of  which  are  carved  several  grotesque  figures  and  devices.  At  the  upper  end  of 
the  chancel  there  formerly  stood  a  large  table  or  altar,  consisting  of  a  marble  slab  of 
extraordinary  dimensions.  A  superstitious  notion  having  prevailed  that  fragments  of  this 
marble  operated  as  a  preservative  against  shipwrecks,  fire,  and  other  calamities,  and  also 
as  an  assurance  of  success  to  the  possessor  in  all  undertakings,  it  has  been  gradually 
diminished,  and  at  length  demolished  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  and  by  various 
visitants,  some  of  whom  have  been  impelled  of  course  by  mere  curiosity  to  possess  them- 
selves of  a  portion  of  so  noted  a  relic.  Near  the  place  where  this  altar  stood,  on  the 
north  side  of  the  choir,  is  a  tombstone  of  black  marble,  on  which  is  a  fine  recumbent 
figure  of  the  abbot  Macfingen,  in  his  sacred  robes,  with  the  crosier  in  his  hand.  The 
stone  is  supported  by  four  pedestals  about  a  foot  high,  and  round  its  margin  is  an  in- 
scription :  Hie  jacet  Johannes  Macfingen  Abbas  de  li,  qui  obiit  Anno  M.  D.  Cujus 
animae  propicietur  Altissimus.  Opposite  to  this  is  a  similar  monument,  executed  in  free- 
stone, to  the  memory  of  the  abbot  Kenneth,  but  it  is  much  defaced.  In  this  cathedral, 
as  in  other  edifices  of  the  same  kind,  various  styles  of  architecture  are  observable. 

The 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  53 

The  monastery  of  lona  was  formerly  the  repository  of  the  most  ancient  Scottish 
records.  Its  library  must  have  contained  some  valuable  treasures  of  literature,  according 
to  the  testimony  of  Boethius,  who  asserts  that  Fergus  II.,  assisting  Alaric  the  Goth  in  the 
sacking  of  Rome,  brought  away,  as  his  share  of  the  spoil,  a  chest  of  books,  which  he 
presented  to  this  monastery.  It  was  the  intention  ofjEneas  Sylvius,  afterwards  Pope 
Pius  II.,  when  in  Scotland,  to  visit  this  library  in  search  of  the  lost  books  of  Livy,  but  he 
was  prevented  by  the  death  of  James  I.  A  small  parcel  of  the  volumes  here  deposited 
was  in  1525  carried  to  Aberdeen,  and  great  pains  were  taken  to  unfold  them,  but  the 
attempt  failed,  in  consequence  of  the  fragility  of  the  decayed  parchment ;  the  portion 
which  it  was  possible  to  decypher  seemed,  in  the  opinion  of  the  learned,  to  belong  rather 
to  a  fragment  of  Sallust,  than  of  Livy.  "  But  the  register  and  records  of  the  island," 
observes  Pennant,  "  all  written  on  parchment,  and  probably  other  more  ancient  and 
valuable  remains,  were  all  destroyed  by  that  worse  than  Gothic  synod,  who  at  the 
reformation  declared  war  against  all  science."  In  these  days  of  antiquarian  and  historical 
research,  when  the  value  of  such  records  is  duly  appreciated,  the  destruction  of  them 
cannot  but  be  deeply  deplored,  as  one  of  the  ill  effects  of  that  zeal  without  knowledge 
which  has  more  or  less  characterized  all  the  struggles  of  mankind  for  religious  liberty,  and 
has,  in  some  instances,  rivalled  the  excesses  of  barbarian  persecution.  If  we  reprobate 
the  fanaticism  of  the  Caliph  Omar,  who  doomed  the  literary  treasures  of  Alexandria  to 
the  flames,  because  he  judged  them  useless  if  they  accorded  with  the  Koran,  and  damnable 
if  at  variance  with  it ;  if  we  condemn  the  unsparing  devastations  committed  on  art  by 
the  Moslems  in  Greece,  and  the  Goths  in  Italy,  we  must  censure  with  equal  severity  those 
outrages  which  were  occasioned  by  a  perversion  of  the  mild  and  tolerant  spirit  of  Chris- 
tianity. When  resistance  to  persecution  degenerates  into  persecution,  the  distinctions  of 
good  and  evil  are  confounded ;  passion  and  prejudice  stifle  the  dictates  of  reason,  and  a 
lawless  conflict  of  retaliation  overthrows  the  balance  of  equity.  The  benefits  accruing 
from  the  reformation,  both  in  England  and  Scotland,  were  retarded  and  diminished  by 
these  causes;  they  might  have  been  more  abundantly  and  rapidly  diffused  if  fewer  unne- 
cessary sacrifices  had  been  made  to  obtain  them.  At  the  present  day,  at  least,  if  that 
measure  were  still  to  be  carried  into  effect,  it  would  seem  very  possible  to  reform  the 
national  church,  without  mutilating  and  desolating  the  edifices  in  which  its  doctrines  were 
promulgated ;  a  religious  seminary  might  be  purified  of  its  abuses  without  destroying  its 
records  and  burning  its  library ;  and  the  light  of  the  gospel  might  be  spread  without 
extinguishing  its  subsidiary  luminaries  of  science  and  of  learning. 

The  high  respect  in  which  this  island  was  formerly  held  is  indicated  by  various  evidences 
besides  the  tombs  of  the  kings  already  noticed.  At  a  small  distance  from  the  church  is 
shewn  a  spot,  under  which  lay  concealed  the  black  stones  upon  which  the  ancient  high- 
land chieftains,  when  they  made  contracts  and  alliances,  used  to  take  the  oath,  which  was 
considered  more  sacred  than  any  other  obligation,  and  not  to  be  violated  without  incurring 

VOL.  in.  L  the 


54  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

the  most  odious  infamy.  Macdonald,  lord  of  the  isles,  conferred  the  rights  of  their  lauds 
on  his  vassals  of  the  isles  and  of  the  mainland,  Avith  uplifted  hands,  and  on  bended  knees, 
upon  the  black  stones ;  and  in  this  posture,  before  many  witnesses,  he  solemnly  swore  that 
he  would  never  recal  the  rights  which  he  then  granted.  An  attestation  sworn  upon  these 
stones  was  held  so  sacred,  that  it  became  proverbial  for  a  person,  who  was  certain  of  what 
he  affirmed,  to  say  that  he  could  make  oath  of  it  upon  the  black  stones. 

The  successors  of  Columba  did  not,  it  seems,  adhere  to  his  strict  prohibition  for  the 
exclusion  of  females  from  the  island.  A  community  of  them  settled  here  after  his  death, 
and  the  ruins  of  their  house  are  still  to  be  seen.  A  great  part  of  the  nunnery  church  is 
entire,  but  is  in  a  most  neglected  state,  having  been  used  by  the  natives  as  a  stable  for 
their  cattle  during  the  night.  At  the  eastern  end  is  the  tomb  of  the  last  prioress,  which 
is  now  much  defaced.  Her  figure  is  carved  in  alto  relievo,  on  a  slab  of  black  marble, 
having  the  figure  of  an  angel  on  each  side.  These  figures  occupy  one  half  the  stone.  On 
the  other  half  is  represented  the  Virgin  Mary,  with  a  mitre  on  her  head,  and  the  infant 
in  her  arms;  and  above  her  are  figures  of  the  sun  and  moon.  Beneath  her  feet  are 
inscribed  the  words  "  Sancta  Maria,  ora  pro  me."  Round  the  stone  is  the  following 
inscription,  in  old  British  characters :  "  Hie  jacet  Domina  Anna  Donaldi  Firleti  filia, 
quondam  Prioressa  de  lona  quoe  obiit  Anno  M.  D.  Xlmo.  cujus  animam  Abrahamo 
commenclamus."  There  are  some  other  monuments  on  the  floor,  but  they  are  so  defaced 
as  to  be  almost  undistinguishable.  The  nuns  resident  here  were  canonesses  of  St. 
Augustine. 

Northward  of  this  building  is  a  causeway  leading  to  the  cathedral,  called  the  Main 
Street.  It  is  joined  by  two  others,  one  of  them  called  the  Royal  Street,  and  the  other 
Martyr  Street,  leading  to  the  Bay  of  Martyrs.  On  the  west  side  of  it  is  an  elegant  cross, 
called  Mac  Lean's  Cross,  being  one  of  a  great  number  that  were  standing  in  this  island 
at  the  time  of  the  reformation,  but  which  were  soon  after  sentenced  to  be  demolished,  by 
order  of  a  provincial  assembly,  held  in  this  island.  These  crosses,  of  which  Mr.  Pennant, 
on  the  authority  of  a  MS.  in  the  Advocates'  library,  states  to  have  been  three  hundred 
and  sixty  at  the  time  of  the  reformation,  were  probably  erected  in  consequence  of  some 
vow,  or  with  the  hope  of  perpetuating  the  memory  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  were 
dedicated.  Another  conjecture  is,  that  they  may  have  been  symbols  designed  to  propitiate 
the  prayers  of  the  living  for  the  souls  of  the  dead. 

The  privileges  of  sanctuary  were  assigned  to  the  precincts  of  the  tombs  in  this  island. 
But  these  privileges  did  not,  by  the  ancient  Scottish  law,  indiscriminately  shelter  every 
offender;  all  atrocious  criminals  were  excluded,  and  only  the  unfortunate  delinquent,  or 
the  penitent  sinner,  could  here  deprecate  the  rigours  of  justice.  They  were  required  to 
make  restoration  of  any  property  they  had  stolen,  and  to  make  oath  that  they  would  steal 
no  more.  The  manslayer  was  enjoined,  on  pain  of  banishment,  to  surrender  himself  to 
the  law,  in  order  that  it  might  be  decided  whether  the  slaughter  committed  amounted  to 

felony 


VOVAOE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN.  55 

felony  or  murder.     Penalties  were  enacted  to  defend  those  refugees  intitled  to  sanctuary 
from  all  molestation  during  their  retreat. 

The  interest  excited  by  the  contemplation  of  these  venerable  ruins  seemed  to  justify 
another  representation  of  them,  under  a  different  aspect  from  the  former;  the  most 
favourable  point  which  presented  itself  was  that  from  which  the  annexed  drawing  was 
taken,  entitled  a  SOUTH-WEST  VIEW  OF  IONA.  It  is  not  improbable  that  this  prospect 
might  have  suggested  to  Dr.  Johnson  that  philosophic  apostrophe  of  which  his  companion 
Mr.  Boswell  speaks  in  so  much  rapture.  "  We  were  now  treading  that  illustrious  island 
which  was  once  the  luminary  of  the  Caledonian  regions,  whence  savage  clans  and  roving 
barbarians  derived  the  benefits  of  knowledge  and  the  blessings  of  religion.  To  abstract 
the  mind  from  all  local  emotion  would  be  impossible  if  it  were  endeavoured,  and  foolish 
if  it  were  possible.  Whatever  withdraws  us  from  the  power  of  our  senses ;  whatever 
makes  the  past,  the  distant,  or  the  future,  predominate  over  the  present,  advances  us  in 
the  dignity  of  thinking  beings.  Far  from  me  and  my  friends  be  such  frigid  philosophy, 
as  may  conduct  us  indifferent  and  unmoved  over  any  ground  which  has  been  dignified  by 
wisdom,  bravery,  or  virtue.  That  man  is  little  to  be  envied  whose  patriotism  would  not 
gain  force  upon  the  plain  of  Marathon,  or  whose  piety  would  not  grow  warmer  among  the 
ruins  of  lona." 

Piety,  however,  is  not  the  only  emotion  which  such  a  scene  as  this  is  calculated  to 
inspire.  If  monasteries  were  the  safeguards  of  religion  and  literature  during  ages  of  bar- 
barism, they  were  also  the  strong-holds  of  spiritual  despotism,  in  which  were  forged  the 
fetters  of  superstition,  and  the  weapons  of  bigotry;  and  though  we  may  deplore  the 
excesses  of  that  undiscriminating  zeal  which  doomed  them  to  utter  desolation,  we  must 
derive  solace  and  even  gratitude  from  the  reflection  that  their  ruins,  like  those  of  a  feudal 
castle,  are  monuments  which  commemorate  the  abolition  of  slavery.  Few  places  of 
ancient  renown  have  been  subjected  to  a  more  signal  degradation  than  this.  According 
to  the  testimony  of  a  recent  tourist,  lona  now  forms  part  of  the  parish  of  Ross,  in  Mull, 
the  minister  of  which  visits  this  isle  once  a  quarter,  to  perform  divine  service ;  and  this 
is  the  principal  religious  instruction  dispensed  upon  a  spot  where  formerly  the  incense  of 
worship  was  continually  ascending,  and  where  missionaries  were  trained  for  the  conversion 
and  guidance  of  surrounding  communities. 

With  respect  to  the  mineralogy  of  the  island  Dr.  Jameson  observes,  that  at  the  usual 
landing-place  from  Mull  the  shore  is  rugged,  and  formed  of  a  rock,  which  appears  to  be 
composed  of  quartz  combined  with  chlorite  and  hornblende.  The  strata  here  observable 
continue  to  the  north-east  extremity  of  the  island,  where  they  give  place  to  hornblende 
slate,  sienite,  and  hornblende  rock,  having  much  the  appearance  of  serpentine.  These 
rocks  alternate  Avith  each  other,  and  are  to  be  observed  traversed  with  basalt  and  granite 
veins.  From  this  place  to  Dun-ii,  the  highest  hill  in  the  island,  the  hornblende  and 
sienite  strata  continue  forming,  upon  some  parts  of  the  coast,  cliffs  of  considerable  height. 

L  2  Toward 


56  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Toward  the  southern  extremity  of  the  coast  there  are  several  sandy  beaches  and  steep 
cliffs.  At  Porta-curach,  celebrated  as  Columba's  landing-place,  there  are  cliffs  of  con- 
siderable height,  composed  of  hornblende  rock,  having  much  the  appearance  of  serpentine 
and  sienite.  The  beach  is  covered  with  innumerable  rounded  fragments  of  marble,  quartz 
of  an  amethystine  hue,  siskin-green-coloured  quartz,  and  lapis  nephriticus.  In  one  part 
of  the  isle  there  is  a  quarry  of  that  species  of  marble  now  called  dolomite,  forming  a  great 
stratum,  about  forty  feet  Avide.  It  extends  N.  N.  W.  and  S.  S.  E.  and  is  bounded  by 
nearly  vertical  strata  of  a  rock,  which  in  some  parts  is  of  the  nature  of  shistose  talc,  or 
passing  to  chlorite  slate.  The  marble,  as  it  approaches  the  other  strata,  is  more  or  less 
mixed  with  talc,  which  causes  it  to  become  scaly  or  fibrous,  with  a  yellowish-green  colour, 
thus  assimilating  with  talcaceous  schistus.  From  the  quarry  to  the  landing-place  the  shore 
is  bare  and  rugged,  and  the  strata  do  not  differ  from  those  already  described.  At  a  short 
distance  there  are  several  islets  and  rocks  entirely  composed  of  red  granite,  which 
circumstance  renders  it  probable  that  the  island  was  formerly  joined  with  the  granite  coast 
of  Ross  in  Mull. 

Marble  is  said  to  have  been  found  in  another  place  besides  the  quarry  above  men- 
tioned. That  the  greater  part  of  the  isle  is  formed  of  limestone  is  a  conclusion  which 
Dr.  Garnett  has  drawn  without  sufficient  evidence,  and  he  is  equally  incorrect  in  stating 
that  the  strata  are  all  of  secondary  formation.  His  account  of  the  botanical  productions 
of  lona  is  entitled  to  greater  attention,  as  it  relates  to  a  subject  which  he  was  better 
qualified  to  illustrate.  On  the  north  shore,  between  Porta-currach  and  the  Hill  of  Angels, 
is  found  in  great  plenty  the  pulmonaria  maritima,  or  sea  bugloss,  a  beautiful  plant,  the 
blossoms  of  which  are  pink  before  they  expand,  but  immediately  change  to  a  fine  blue. 
The  eryngium  maritimum,  or  sea  holly,  occurs  here  in  equal  abundance.  Among  the 
ruins,  in  almost  every  part,  both  of  the  nunnery  and  the  cathedral,  grows  the  cotyledon 
umbilicus,  or  navel-wort.  The  menyanthes  trifoliatum,  or  marsh  trefoil,  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  of  our  native  flowers,  and  distinguished  by  its  woolly  petals,  grows  in  great 
plenty  in  the  pond  above  the  cathedral.  A  considerable  part  of  the  skirts  of  Dun-ii  is 
covered  with  the  anagallis  tenella,  or  purple-flowered  money-wort.  The  juniperus  com- 
munis,  or  juniper  tree,  is  common  on  most  of  the  hills,  though  of  a  dwarfish  size.  The 
salix  lapponum,  or  Lapland  willow,  a  very  scarce  shrub,  grows  not  far  from  the  marble 
quarry. 

In  citing  the  above  authorities  respecting  the  geology  and  natural  history  of  the 
island,  it  became  necessary  to  examine  how  the  same  subjects  are  treated  in  Johnson's 
Journey  to  the  Hebrides.  They  are  passed  over  in  silence.  The  doctor  seems  to  have 
been  a  stranger  to  this  as  well  as  many  other  sources  of  delight  and  profit  in  travel. 
"When  he  undertook  his  journey  he  had  passed  a  long  life  in  cities  and  among  books;  he 
had  cultivated  learning  rather  than  science;  he  was  no  proficient  in  botany,  or  in  mine- 
ralogy ;  he  had  read  largely,  and  had  meditated  profoundly,  but  his  researches  were 

confined 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  5? 

confined  chiefly  to  criticism,  philology,  and  morals.  His  reputation  as  a  lexicographer 
had  elevated  him  to  a  sort  of  dictatorship  in  the  republic  of  letters,  and  he  might  possibly 
deem  it  consistent  with  this  dignity  to  hold  those  studies  in  lowest  estimation  with  which 
he  was  least  conversant.  In  those  interesting  specimens  of  his  conversation  recorded  by 
Mr.  Boswell,  there  is  a  manifest  disposition  to  dogmatize,  or,  as  the  familiar  phrase  is,  to 
lay  down  the  law,  on  all  occasions,  as  if  he  had  imagined,  that  in  denning  the  terms  of 
a  language  he  had  necessarily  explored  the  boundaries  of  human  knowledge.  In  his 
writings  the  same  disposition,  though  generally  restrained  by  good  sense,  at  times  displays 
itself,  and  the  modest  demeanour  of  the  author  is  superseded  by  the  condescending  air  of 
the  critic.  This  was  a  disadvantage  to  him  as  a  traveller,  and  he  laboured  under  many 
others.  His  mighty  mind  could  not  occupy  itself  with  those  minute  details  in  social  life 
which  are  the  province  of  an  observer  of  manners  ;  his  organs  of  vision  were  so  enfeebled 
that  he  could  not  contemplate  the  sublime  and  beautiful  in  nature ;  he  had  no  ear  for 
music,  and  could  form  but  a  faint  conception  of  its  influence  on  national  feelings ;  he  had 
a  stubborn  attachment  to  his  own  prejudices,  and  very  little  toleration  for  those  of  others. 
He  was  subject  to  much  bodily  suffering,  and  to  this  cause  may  be  ascribed  that  way- 
wardness of  temper  which  sometimes  thwarted  the  benevolent  and  kindly  impulses  of  his 
heart.  His  constitutional  melancholy  had  been  deepened  by  infirmity  and  age ;  he  had 
seen  the  circle  of  his  enjoyments  diminish  in  proportion  as  his  stores  of  knowledge  aug- 
mented, and  he  had  ascended  by  toilsome  steps  to  that  bright  but  chilling  eminence  of 
wisdom  from  which  all  earthly  concerns  appear  to  be  vanity.  With  such  a  man  few 
would  venture  to  be  familiar;  few  would  be  disposed  to  offer  him  that  information  on 
local  matters  which  he  might  probably  reject  as  superfluous,  or  disregard  as  unimportant. 
It  is  not  therefore  a  matter  of  surprise  that  he  should  have  overlooked  so  many  interesting 
objects  in  his  journey  through  Scotland ;  the  wonder  is,  that  those  which  engaged  his 
attention  should  have  interested  him  so  much.  His  narrative  contains  many  just  and 
striking  observations,  interwoven  with  a  meagre  and  homely  detail  of  his  personal  adven- 
tures, and  but  rarely  relieved  by  descriptions  of  natural  scenery.  On  some  things,  which, 
though  slightly  mentioned,  had  evidently  engrossed  his  thoughts,  the  reader  is  led  to 
conclude  that  he  might  and  should  have  said  more :  and  these  occasions  of  disappoint- 
ment occur  so  often,  that  the  book  becomes  tedious  even  by  its  brevity.  We  miss  those 
animated  colloquies  in  which  Dr.  Johnson,  in  his  happier  moments,  relaxed  the  habitual 
sternness  of  his  brow ;  we  feel  assured,  that  in  the  various  hospitalities  of  which  he  par- 
took, there  must  have  been  "  much  good  talk,"  which  his  notions  of  propriety  deterred 
him  from  recording,  and  are  grieved  at.  being  denied  the  smallest  share  in  this  fund  of 
amusement.  But  his  object  was  rather  to  instruct  than  to  entertain :  he  seems  to  have 
disdained  the  miscellaneous  pursuits  of  a  tourist,  and  to  have  sat  down  after  his  journey 
principally  with  the  intention  of  composing  an  essay  on  the  state  of  society  in  the 
Hebrides. 

From 


58  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

From  lona  the  voyage  was  resumed  to  the  isle  of  Ulva,  situated  at  the  entrance  of 
Loch-na-gal.  Its  position  is  somewhat  remarkable,  as  may  be  observed  on  reference  to 
the  annexed  VIEW  OF  BENMORE  FROM  ABOVE  ULVA  HOUSE.  The  mountain  of  Benmore, 
the  highest  in  the  adjacent  island  of  Mull,  appears  to  rise  from  its  shore,  in  one  un- 
interrupted sweep  from  the  base  to  the  summit,  forming  the  principal  feature  in  a  range 
of  highlands  which  seem  stupendous  when  the  eye  measures  them  by  the  scale  of  the 
mansion  on  the  isle  below.  Ulva  House  is  the  country  residence  of  Sir  Reginald  Mac- 
donald,  whose  seignorial  appellation  is  Staffa.  He  is  the  proprietor  of  the  island  of  that 
name,  as  well  as  of  Ulva,  Inchkenneth,  and  some  islets  in  this  vicinity,  which  are  prin- 
cipally occupied  as  pasturage  for  black  cattle  and  sheep.  It  would  be  a  superfluous 
compliment  to  say,  that  his  hospitality  is  truly  worthy  of  his  rank,  but  the  recollection  of 
it  brings  to  mind  many  pleasing  associations  which  should  not  be  tacitly  dismissed.  On 
every  hand  were  seen  the  effects  of  those  agricultural  improvements  which  Sir  Reginald 
has  carried  on  with  so  much  spirit  and  activity ;  and  at  this  period,  which  was  the  season 
of  the  hay-harvest,  they  appeared  to  peculiar  advantage.  A  stranger  entering  suddenly 
upon  such  a  scene,  prepossessed  with  an  idea  of  that  rugged  barrenness  by  which  Ulva 
was  formerly  characterised,  could  not  but  survey  it  with  a  feeling  the  very  converse  of 
disappointment,  and  not  definable  by  the  common  antithesis  of  an-  agreeable  surprise. 
To  heighten  the  gratification  thus  produced,  here  is  a  garden  which,  by  the  variety  and 
richness  of  its  products,  might  vie  with  those  of  a  more  favoured  clime,  and  which  proves 
that  even  in  the  Hebrides  the  vows  paid  to  Flora  are  not  ungraciously  requited.  In 
bringing  it  to  its  present  prosperous  state  of  culture,  the  proprietor  doubtless  encountered 
many  prejudices,  and  was  greeted  with  many  desponding  expostulations:  but  it  is  to  be 
presumed,  that  an  example  so  eminently  successful  will  excite  a  general  spirit  of  emulation 
among  his  neighbours,  and  will  be  imitated  wherever  it  is  practicable.  The  blooming 
appearance  of  this  place  forms  a  delightful  contrast  with  the  bleak  aspect  of  the  mountains 
within  view.  The  traces  of  tillage  on  a  spot  surrounded  by  so  much  sterility,  interest  us 
like  the  first  faint  tinge  of  returning  health  on  a  countenance  long  wasted  by  sickness  or 
famine. 

In  the  summer  months  the  isle  is  seldom  destitute  of  visitors.  It  commands  a  very 
grand  view  of  the  mountain  scenery  which  bounds  Loch-na-gal,  and  is  the  most  convenient 
place  of  embarkation  for  those  who  wish  to  extend  their  excursion  to  Staffa.  At  the  inn 
at  Ulva  is  kept  a  kind  of  album  or  register  in  which  travellers,  who  are  so  inclined,  may 
inscribe  their  names,  with  a  brief  record  of  their  peregrinations,  "  after  what  flourish  they 
please."  As  is  usual  in  such  cases,  most  of  the  attempts  at  impromptu  are  abortive,  some 
are  whimsical,  and  but  few  are  pleasing  and  appropriate.  This  poll-tax  upon  wit  is  rarely 
very  productive,  for  it  is  too  abruptly  levied  for  the  coinage  of  most  brains  to  afford 
payment  in  sterling. 

The  Highlanders  are  principally  farmers,  herdsmen,  and  fishers.  On  various  parts  of 

the 


View  of  Ben-more  from  near  Ulva  house 


Remains  of  the  Chapel  &c  on  Inch  Kenneth 


VOVAGK     ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  59 

the  coast  the  operation  of  kelp-burning  is  carried  on  to  considerable  extent.  The  fishing- 
grounds  in  its  vicinity  are  said  to  be  very  productive.  The  circumference  of  Ulva  is 
rather  more  than  two  miles.  On  its  western  side  is  the  islet  of  Gometra,  which  has  two 
good  harbours  for  small  craft,  one  facing  the  south,  the  other  the  north.  In  the  strait 
which  divides  Ulva  from  Mull,  there  is  good  anchorage  for  coasting  vessels. 

Southward  from  Ulva,  and  distant  about  a  mile  from  the  coast  of  Mull,  is  the  little 
verdant  isle  of  Inchkenneth,  which  once  held  a  seminary  of  ecclesiastics,  probably  subor- 
dinate to  the  monastery  of  I-columb-kill.  In  the  view  here  given,  entitled  RUINS  OF  THE 
CHAPEL,  &c.  ON  INCHKENNETH,  we  see  the  remains  of  an  ancient  chapel,  the  cemetery 
of  which  is  covered  with  tombstones  of  chieftains  and  other  eminent  personages,  and  still 
continues  to  be  a  place  of  sepulture.  The  ruined  edifice  to  the  left  was  once  the  residence 
of  Sir  Allan  Maclean,  who,  with  his  two  daughters,  so  hospitably  entertained  Dr.  Johnson 
and  his  friends  on  their  visit  to  this  island.  The  description  which  their  learned  guest 
has  given  of  this  visit,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  passages  in  his  narrative.  He 
observes  that  romance  does  not  often  exhibit  a  scene  which  strikes  the  imagination  more 
than  this  little  isle  in  the  depth  of  western  obscurity,  occupied  not  by  a  gross  herdsman, 
or  an  amphibious  fisherman,  but  by  a  gentleman  and  two  ladies  of  high  birth,  polished 
manners,  and  elegant  conversation,  who  practised  all  the  kindness  of  hospitality  and 
refinement  of  courtesy.  The  cottage  he  represents  as  wanting  little  that  palaces  could 
afford ;  neat  apartments,  fare  equally  plentiful  and  delicate,  books,  music,  and  whatever 
else  was  necessary  to  make  retirement  agreeable.  He  has  sketched  the  following  gay  little 
picture  of  their  social  circle.  "  We  passed  the  remaining  part  of  the  day  in  such  amuse- 
ments as  were  in  our  power.  Sir  Allan  related  the  American  campaign,  and  in  the 
evening  one  of  the  ladies  played  on  her  harpsichord,  while  Col  and  Mr.  Boswell  danced 
a  Scottish  reel  with  the  other."  It  is  mournful  to  see  this  abode  of  domestic  felicity  now 
abandoned  to  solitude  and  decay.  The  ruins  of  a  castle  or  a  cloister  excite  less  regret, 
because  they  suggest  images  of  painful  captivity  or  cheerless  penance ;  of  turbulence, 
disquietude,  and  gloom,  rather  than  of  peaceful  and  refined  enjoyment.  In  the  fate  of 
this  humbler  structure  there  is  something  truly  pathetic ;  it  reminds  us  of  the  pastor's 
mansion  in  Goldsmith's  Deserted  Village,  or  of  the  habitation  which  St.  Pierre  assigns  to 
his  hapless  children  of  nature  among  the  lonely  shades  of  the  Mauritius.  If  we  would 
behold  an  emblem  comprising  all  those  figures  by  which  Mr.  Campbell  so  touchingly 
represents  the  desolation  of  Wyoming,  we  may  pause  before  the  deserted  and  roofless 
dwelling  of  Sir  Allan  and  his  daughters : 

"  Seek  we  their  much  lov'd  home  ? 
The  hand  is  gone  that  cropt  its  flowers, 
Cold  is  the  hearth  within  their  bowers, 

And  should  we  thither  roam, 
Its  echoes  and  its  empty  tread 
Would  sound  like  voices  from  the  dead." 

Recurring; 


60  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

Recurring  to  other  objects  delineated  in  the  view,  it  may  be  necessary  to  explain  that 
the  mountain  in  the  back-ground,  whose  verdant  ascent  terminates  in  a  steep  and  rocky 
summit,  is  Gribune  Head,  in  the  isle  of  Mull.  The  volumes  of  smoke  observable  arise 
from  the  burning  of  kelp,  which  is  found  in  great  abundance  on  the  shores  of  Inchkenneth. 
At  the  period  of  this  visit  the  people  were  employed  in  gathering  it.  The  following  is 
Dr.  Jameson's  account  of  the  method  of  manufacturing  this  article.  "  The  different 
species  of  fuci,  particularly  the  vesiculosus,  serratus,  and  nodosus,  are  cut  from  the  rocks 
in  the  months  of  May,  June,  and  July,  and  spread  out  and  dried,  so  as  to  enable  them  to 
burn  more  easily.  In  drying  the  ware  they  are  very  cautious  to  prevent  any  fermentation 
from  taking  place,  or  any  exposure  to  the  rain ;  as  kelp  made  from  such  ware  is  neces- 
sarily of  a  very  inferior  quality.  When  well  dried,  a  small  quantity  is  kindled  in  a  pit  dug 
in  the  sand,  or  upon  a  piece  of  ground  which  is  surrounded  with  loose  stones,  so  as  to  form 
what  is  called  a  kiln.  They  continue  adding  fresh  quantities  until  the  pit  or  kiln  is 
nearly  filled ;  the  whole  is  frequently  stirred  towards  evening,  when  it  gets  into  a  semi- 
fluid state ;  it  is  allowed  to  cool,  and  is  afterwards  taken  out  of  the  pit,  ready  for  the 
market." 

"  This  useful  material,"  he  remarks  in  another  place,  "  does  not  appear  to  have  been 
known  as  a  manufacture  in  Britain  until  some  time  after  the  beginning  of  the  present 
century,  owing  to  the  backward  state  of  the  soap  and  glass  manufactures,  particularly  in 
Scotland.  Its  first  introduction  (among  the  Hebrides)  was  about  the  year  1730,  into  the 
island  of  Uist,  by  a  Highland  gentleman  of  the  name  of  Macleod,  who  brought  the  art 
from  Ireland,  where  it  had  been  carried  on  many  years  before.  The  method  practised  by 
him  was  a  bad  one,  as  he  was  satisfied  by  merely  reducing  the  sea-ware,  or  fuci,  to  ashes. 
This  practice  was  soon  discontinued,  and  the  method  of  fusion  was  adopted."  This 
ingredient  renders  it  useful  in  the  composition  of  soap,  in  the  manufacture  of  alum,  and 
in  the  formation  of  crown  and  bottle  glass ;  and  in  these  processes  kelp  answers  all  the 
purposes  of  potash,  which  cannot  be  procured  without  great  expense  from  abroad,  while 
the  former  can  be  obtained  by  the  industry  of  our  own  people,  on  our  own  shores.  It 
has  gradually  become  a  very  productive  branch  of  commerce.  During  the  late  war, 
when  the  usual  importations  of  barilla  were  prevented,  the  price  of  kelp  rose  to  eleven 
pounds  a  ton,  which,  admitting  the  cost  of  manufacturing  it  to  have  been  thirty  shillings, 
yielded  an  immense  profit.  It  was  calculated  that  five  hundred  tons  were  annually  made 
in  Mull;  the  quantity  now  manufactured  is  of  course  regulated  by  the  demand,  and  by 
the  prices  obtained. 

The  marine  plants  from  which  kelp  is  made  arc  forced  up  from  the  sea  by  the  flux  of 
the  tides  against  rocks,  to  which  they  adhere  and  grow,  not  unfrequently  covering  them 
to  a  considerable  depth.  On  account  of  their  great  value  for  the  above  purpose,  as  well 
as  for  manure,  artificial  means  have  been  devised  for  propagating  them.  It  has  been 

recommended 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  6'1 

recommended  to  roll  stones  upon  the  shores,  which  in  many  places  may  be  clone  with 
little  expense ;  and  these  in  two  years  will  be  covered  with  crops  of  fuci  fit  for  gathering. 
Sandstone  or  basalt  may  be  used,  but  the  preference  is  generally  given  to  calcareous 
stones. 

On  the  west  side  of  Inchkenneth,  looking  southward  on  lona,  there  are  remains  of 
a  cross.  Its  date  may  be  supposed  to  be  coeval  with  that  of  the  ecclesiastical  establish- 
ment, whose  demolition  it  has  survived ;  but  tradition  offers  no  particulars  to  explain  the 
occasion  or  purpose  of  its  erection.  The  isle  in  its  present  state  retains  but  little  that 
would  gratify  the  researches  of  the  antiquary,  and  rather  claims  the  notice  of  the  agricul- 
turist. It  affords  good  pasturage,  and  is  stocked  with  black  cattle,  sheep,  and  goats. 
Its  extent  is  about  a  mile  in  length,  and  half  a  mile  in  breadth.  To  explore  a  space  so 
limited  did  not  require  much  time,  or  give  rise  to  any  remarkable  variety  of  incident. 
The  only  circumstance  worth  noticing  was  that  of  a  number  of  small  whales,  which  were 
seen  swimming  in  various  directions  about  the  coast. 

In  sailing  from  this  isle  to  the  north-eastward  up  Loch-na-gal,  the  mountain,  alreadv 
mentioned,  still  continued  to  be  one  of  the  most  prominent  features  of  the  coast  of  Mull; 
its  aspect,  as  beheld  from  the  sea,  is  represented  in  the  view  here  given,  entitled  GRIBUNK 
HEAD.  The  neighbouring  isle  is  that  of  Inchkenneth.  The  smoke,  arising  from  the 
burning  of  kelp  at  its  base,  tended,  as  in  other  instances,  to  render  the  rocky  masses 
more  picturesque,  by  veiling  their  asperities  in  partial  obscurity  ;  less  impressive,  it  must 
be  owned,  than  the  gloom  of  a  tempest,  which  augments  so  highly  the  grandeur  of  this 
scene.  At  such  a  period,  the  dashing  of  the  furious  ocean  below,  and  the  fall  of  the 
swollen  torrents  from  the  rocks  above,  seen  dimly  through  the  mist,  are  said  to  produce 
an  effect  uncommonly  sublime;  but  to  voyagers  along  the  shore  there  was  no  great  pain 
in  being  disappointed,  by  favourable  weather,  of  so  exalted  an  enjoyment.  Of  the  boats 
represented  in  the  view,  the  one  bearing  the  flag  has  a  party  of  visitors  to  Staffa  on  board, 
the  others  are  in  pursuit  offish.  The  presence  of  a  shoal  of  herrings  is  indicated  by  the 
appearance  of  some  of  those  small  whales,  already  mentioned,  in  the  position  in  which 
those  animals  are  so  frequently  seen,  the  dorsal  fins  appearing  above  the  surface  of  the 
water.  In  the  pursuit  of  their  prey  they  are  usually  attended  by  flocks  of  sea-birds, 
which  hover  over  their  course  to  pick  up  the  refuse  of  their  victims.  This  circumstance 
is  here  introduced  as  characteristic  of  the  Hebridean  seas. 

At  Gribune  there  is  a  natural  curiosity,  which  Dr.  Johnson  considered  one  of  the 
greatest  that  he  saw  during  his  tour.  It  is  called  Mackinnon's  Cave,  from  a  tradition  that 
a  gentleman  of  that  name,  whose  curiosity  had  been  excited  by  various  reports  of  its 
amazing  extent,  went  in  to  explore  it,  and  was  never  again  heard  of.  As  the  place  has 
been  investigated  with  better  success  in  later  times,  the  conclusion  is,  that  he  must  have 
been  killed  by  persons  who  had  taken  shelter  there,  and  who  considered  him  as  a 
dangerous  spy  or  intruder.  The  following  is  Dr.  Johnson's  account  of  his  visit  to  it. 

VOL.  in.  M  "  We 


02  VOYAGE    ROUND    CHEAT    BRITAIN. 

"  We  had  been  disappointed  already  by  one  cave,  and  were  not  much  elevated  by  the 
expectation  of  another.  It  was  yet  better  to  see  it,  and  we  stopped  at  some  rocks  on  the 
coast  of  Mull.  The  mouth  is  fortified  by  vast  fragments  of  stone,  over  which  we  made 
our  way  neither  very  nimbly  nor  very  securely.  The  place,  however,  well  repaid  our 
trouble.  The  bottom,  as  far  as  the  flood  rushes  in,  was  encumbered  with  large  pebbles ; 
but  as  we  advanced,  was  spread  over  with  smooth  sand.  The  breadth  is  about  forty-five 
feet :  the  roof  rises  in  an  arch,  almost  regular,  to  a  height  which  we  could  not  measure ; 
but  I  think  it  about  thirty  feet.  Having  passed  inward  from  the  sea  to  a  great  depth, 
we  found  on  the  right  hand  a  narrow  passage,  perhaps  not  more  than  six  feet  wide, 
obstructed  by  great  stones,  over  which  we  climbed,  and  came  into  a  second  cave,  in 
breadth  twenty-five  feet.  The  air  in  this  apartment  was  very  warm,  but  not  oppressive, 
nor  loaded  with  vapours.  Our  light  shewed  no  tokens  of  a  feculent  or  corrupted 
atmosphere.  Here  was  a  square  stone,  called,  as  we  were  told,  Fingal's  Table.  If  we 
had  been  provided  with  torches  we  should  have  proceeded  in  our  search,  though  we  had 
already  gone  as  far  as  any  former  adventurer,  except  some  who  are  reported  never  to  have 
returned  ;  and  measuring  our  way  back,  we  found  it  more  than  a  hundred  and  sixty  yards, 
the  eleventh  part  of  a  mile." 

With  respect  to  the  mineralogy  of  the  island  of  Mull,  it  is  observed  that  a  great  part 
of  it  lies  on  a  mass  of  whinstone,  only  different  from  basaltes  in  the  coarseness  of  its  grain. 
In  many  places  the  rocks  are  basaltic,  and  often  assume  a  regular  columnar  form. 
Limestone  abounds,  and  some  seams  of  coal  have  been  found  in  different  parts.  There 
is  one  about  three  feet  thick,  in  the  hill  of  Bien-anini,  the  property  of  Sir  James  Riddel, 
containing  coal  of  good  quality,  which,  however,  it  has  not  been  found  practicable  to 
work  to  advantage.  In  one  place  a  stratum  of  coal  has  been  found  under  basaltes,  a 
circumstance  of  very  rare  occurrence  in  geology.  No  expectations,  however,  have  been 
formed  of  any  great  abundance  of  this  mineral  in  the  island ;  and  it  is  held  to  be  incon- 
sistent with  experience,  that  a  territory,  consisting  chiefly  of  whinstone,  should  contain 
strata  of  coal  to  any  considerable  extent.  The  subject,  however,  deserves  elaborate 
investigation,  as  the  establishment  of  coal-works  in  so  centrical  a  part  of  the  Hebrides 
would  give  new  life  to  the  operations  of  agriculture,  and  would  contribute  very  materially 
to  the  comforts  and  prosperity  of  the  inhabitants. 

The  next  subject  is  a  VIEW  ON  LOCH-NA-GAL,  NEAU  KNOCK,  including  Ben-Talla, 
and  other  mountains,  which  rise  from  its  shores.  Near  the  rocks  in  the  foreground  are 
introduced  some  seals  basking,  in  the  position  in  which  these  amphibious  animals  are 
frequently  observed  on  the  lonely  coasts  of  these  islands.  The  mansion  seen  in  the 
distance  is  Knock,  the  hospitable  residence  of  Colonel  Donald  Campbell.  It  stands  near 
the  extremity  of  the  loch,  on  the  western  boundary  of  that  isthmus  which  separates  it 
from  the  bay  of  Aros  on  the  sound  of  Mull.  The  mountain  scenery  represented  in  this 
view  may  be  considered  as  generally  characteristic  of  the  bleak  and  rugged  surface  of  the 

island. 


Gribune-head  in  Mull 


Loch-na-gael,  near  Knock  on  Mull 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  63 

island.  The  only  parts  susceptible  of  cultivation  are  the  valleys  and  glens  around  the 
bases  of  the  hills,  and  some  small  strips  of  land  near  the  coast;  in  many  of  these  spots, 
as  the  sun  shines  on  them  for  only  a  few  hours,  vegetation  is  retarded,  and  the  harvest 
is  always  late,  and  very  precarious..  The  climate  is  considered  as  having  become  still 
more  unpropitious  to  agriculture  since  the  disappearance  of  the  ancient  woods  of  the 
country;  and  it  has  been  asserted,  that  as  this  disappearance  originated  in  an  unfavourable 
change  of  the  seasons  in  Britain,  no  remedy  can  ever  be  effected  to  any  extent  by  plant- 
ation. It  is  said  that  trees,  which  flourished  here  in  former  ages,  cannot  now,  by  any 
care  or  attention,  be  brought  to  a  thriving  state.  In  confirmation  of  this  opinion 
respecting  the  unfavourable  change  of  the  seasons,  the  following  observations  have  been 
cited  from  the  statistical  account  of  Kilwinning,  in  Ayrshire.  "  It  is  in  the  recollection 
of  many  persons  still  living,  that  the  summers,  in  this  part  of  the  country  at  least,  are 
much  more  wet  and  cold  than  they  were  fifty  years  ago.  By  men  of  undoubted  veracity 
it  is  asserted,  as  an  absolutely  certain  fact,  that  at  that  period  the  farmers,  in  ploughing 
for  barley,  about  the  middle  of  the  month  of  May,  were  under  the  necessity  of  beginning 
to  plough  so  very  early  as  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  to  leave  off  at  eight.  The 
heat  at  that  hour  became  so  intense  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  continue  their 
work  any  longer;  nor  could  they  begin  again  till  between  four  and  five  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon.  Fora  number  of  years  past  quite  the  reverse  has  been  the  case.  The  month 
of  May,  in  particular,  has  been  very  cold  and  wet,  and  unfavourable  to  vegetation ;  and 
in  some  years  we  have  had  very  little  of  what  may  be  reckoned  summer  weather.  The 
harvest,  of  course,  then,  was  much  earlier  than  it  has  been  since.  In  several  parts  of  the 
neighbourhood  it  is  said  that  the  harvest  was  finished  about  the  latter  end  of  August." 
If  these  changes  arise  from  the  increasing  prevalence  of  violent  winds  from  the  westward, 
the  island  of  Mull,  from  its  exposed  situation,  must  have  suffered  from  them  in  a  very 
great  degree.  There  are  still  some  traces  of  the  extensive  woods  which  clothed  it  in 
former  ages  ;  and  these  must  have  been  more  considerable  at  the  period  of  Dr.  Johnson's 
visit  than  at  present,  notwithstanding  the  sarcasm  which  that  tourist  uttered  to  Sir  Allan 
Maclean  when  he  pointed  them  out  to  him  :  "  Sir,  I  saw  at  Tobermorie  what  they  called 
n  wood,  which  I  mistook  for  heath  :  if  you  shew  me  what  I  shall  take  for  furze,  it  will  be 
something." 

Some  of  the  mountains  of  Mull  afford  excellent  sheep-walks,  and  that  sort  of  stock 
has  now  become  a  favourite  one  in  the  island.  The  country  is  also  well  adapted  to  the 
sustenance  of  black  cattle,  great  numbers  of  which  are  annually  reared  and  exported ; 
and  it  is  chiefly  by  the  sale  of  them  that  the  small  tenants  make  up  their  rents.  Those 
who  find  this  resource  inadequate  are  obliged,  after  they  have  tilled  their  little  arable 
ground,  to  go  and  seek  employment  in  some  of  the  southern  districts,  or  pursue  the 
occupation  of  kelp-burning.  In  this  way  they  continue  to  amass  a  little  money,  with 
which  they  return  at  harvest-time.  As  there  are  very  few  inclosures,  the  farmers  are 

obliged 


64  VOYAGE    BOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

obliged  to  employ  herdsmen  to  tend  their  cattle,  and  prevent  them  from  eating  up  the 
crops,  or  trespassing  on  the  property  of  their  neighbours.  In  the  occupation  of  these 
herdsmen,  the  indolence  of  pastoral  life  is  fully  exemplified ;  they  are  generally  to  be 
seen  sitting  on  a  bank,  attended  by  their  dogs,  which  are  so  trained  as  to  save  them  a 
great  deal  of  personal  labour,  by  fetching  up  the  cattle  when  they  go  astray.  This 
monotonous  and  apparently  inanimate  sort  of  existence  seems  not  to  be  without  its 
charm,  for  the  men  are  so  far  enamoured  of  it,  that  they  quit  it  with  reluctance :  they 
have  ample  leisure,  though  no  very  great  range,  for  contemplation ;  and  perhaps  among 
these  humble  mountaineers  tradition  may  have  preserved  some  fragments  of  Gaelic  song, 
some  romantic  story  of  their  forefathers,  for  the  solace  of  their  lonely  hours.  To  exchange 
this  pastoral  tranquillity  for  the  vicissitudes  of  a  military  life,  might  seem  too  abrupt  a 
transition  for  the  human  character,  under  any  circumstances,  to  adapt  itself  to ;  yet  it  is 
stated,  that  during  the  late  war  considerable  bodies  of  very  valuable  troops  were  raised 
from  among  this  hardy  race  of  men. 

It  has  already  been  noticed  that  the  common  crop  grown  here  is  a  very  inferior  kind 
of  oats,  called  by  the  inhabitants  small  oats.  The  sowing  generally  takes  place  about  the 
end  of  March,  and  it  is  not  before  October,  and  sometimes  November,  that  the  harvest 
is  completed.  The  common  return  is  three  seeds,  and  so  light  that  two  bolls  of  oats  only 
make  one  of  meal.  Barley  is  sown  in  April,  and  is  ripe  about  the  end  of  August.  It 
generally  returns  from  six  to  ten  seeds ;  and  when  sown  on  old  ground,  manured  with  sea- 
ware,  it  sometimes  produces  sixteen-fold.  The  greatest  part  of  the  barley  is  made  into 
whiskey,  of  which  the  consumption,  notwithstanding  legislative  restrictions,  is  still  much 
too  general  in  the  highlands.  The  sea-ware  and  shell-sand,  used  as  manure,  are  carried 
to  the  fields  generally  on  the  backs  of  horses,  in  baskets  or  creels.  Until  very  lately  each 
farmer  constructed  his  own  plough,  after  the  primitive  and  rude  fashion  of  the  country, 
which  had  prevailed  for  centuries.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  spirit  of  agricultural 
improvement,  for  which  Scotland  has  of  late  been  so  eminently  distinguished,  will  extend 
its  beneficial  influence  to  this  neglected  region. 

Having  again  traversed  the  isthmus  eastward  from  Knock,  a  very  extensive  prospect 
presented  itself,  which  is  represented  in  the  annexed  view  of  CRUACHAN  BEN,  in 
Argyleshire,  looking  over  the  sound  of  Mull,  near  the  shore  of  which,  on  a  low  projecting 
point  of  land,  are  seen  the  ruins  of  the  castle  of  Artornish.  The  bridge  in  the  middle- 
ground  is  over  a  rivulet,  which  runs  into  Aros  bay.  An  excellent  road  extends  through 
this  district,  commencing  at  Auchnucraig,  (from  whence  there  is  a  ferry  to  Oban),  and 
leading  through  Aros  to  the  improving  harbour  of  Tobermory.  This  scene,  independently 
of  the  various  picturesque  objects  which  it  comprehends,  seemed  to  claim  particular 
notice,  as  being  that  to  which  Mr.  Scott  has  imparted  so  high  an  interest  in  the  opening 
of  his  "  Lord  of  the  Isles."  Here  is  the  bay  of  Aros,  from  which  the  fleet  of  Lord  Ronald 
unmoored,  when  that  chieftain  embarked  to  espouse  the  maid  of  Lorn ;  here  is  the  sound 

of 


Distant  View  of  Cruachan-ben,  taken  near  Arros  bridge,  Isle  of  Mull 


Arros  Castle,  Isle  of  Mull 


VOYAGE  ROUND  GREAT  BRITAIN.  65 

of  Mull,  along  which  the  galleys  held  their  course,  while  the  lonely  bark  of  Robert 
Bruce  was  beating  up  against  the  gale ;  and  in  the  distance  is  the  castle  of  Artornish, 
where  the  fair  Edith  awaited  the  reluctant  coming  of  her  spouse,  and  where  so  many 
untoward  and  portentous  circumstances  conspired  to  retard  their  union.  Although  these 
incidents  are  merely  imaginary,  yet  they  compel  the  reader  to  form  within  his  own  mind 
some  picture  of  the  places  in  which  they  occurred;  and  the  fictitious  scene,  if  the 
resemblance  be  tolerably  correct,  cannot  fail  to  give  an  interest  to  the  real  one.  Of  Mr. 
Scott's  peculiar  merits,  one  of  the  most  estimable  is  his  accuracy  of  local  description  ; 
it  is  the  accuracy  of  one  who  is  confident  of  having  observed  what  he  undertakes  to 
describe;  but  no  verbal  description,  however  accurate,  can  convey  a  true  idea  of  the 
original.  It  has  been  remarked,  that  of  every  place  which  we  have  heard  of,  but  never 
seen,  the  image  we  conceive  is  invariably  erroneous ;  hence  one  of  the  chief  purposes  of 
delineation  is  to  supply  the  means  of  forming  a  more  just  conception.  In  the  present 
instance,  the  view  here  given,  if  considered  with  reference  to  the  imagery  in  the  first 
canto  of  the  poem  alluded  to,  may  serve  to  exemplify  the  superior  felicity  of  description 
which  is  there  displayed. 

The  distant  mountain  of  Cruachan  Ben  is  one  of  the.  highest  in  Argyleshire.  Its 
perpendicular  height,  from  the  level  of  the  sea,  is  estimated  at  3300  feet,  and  the  cir- 
cumference of  its  base  exceeds  twenty  miles.  It  is  very  steep  towards  the  north-east, 
and  has  a  gentle  inclination  on  the  south,  but  rises  with  an  abrupt  ascent  near  the 
summit,  which  is  divided  into  two  peaks.  The  woods  with  which  its  sides  are  covered 
abound  with  roes  and  red  deer.  On  the  top  of  this  mountain  was  the  fatal  spring,  from 
which,  according  to  a  tradition  of  the  country,  ascribed  to  Ossian,  issued  Loch  Awe. 
To  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  district  within  view,  Cruachan  Ben  serves  as  a  weather-gage. 
On  the  approach  of  a  storm  "  the  spirit  of  the  mountain  shrieks,"  and  its  head  and  sides 
are  enveloped  with  clouds.  The  story  of  its  fatal  spring,  which,  bursting  forth  suddenly, 
overwhelmed  the  valley,  and  formed  Loch  Awe,  is  the  original  of  one  of  the  ancient 
Celtic  poems  preserved  by  tradition.  The  following  is  the  version  of  it  given  by  Dr, 
Smith  of  Campbeltown.  "  Bera  the  aged  dwelt  in  the  cave  of  the  rock.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  Grianan  the  sage.  Long  was  the  line  of  her  fathers,  and  she  was  the  last  of 
her  race.  Large  and  fertile  were  her  possessions;  hers  the  beautiful  vales  below,  and 
hers  the  cattle  which  roamed  on  the  hills  around.  To  Bera  was  committed  the  charge 
of  that  awful  spring,  which,  by  the  appointment  of  fate,  was  to  prove  so  fatal  to  the 
inheritance  of  her  fathers,  and  her  fathers'  race.  Before  the  sun  should  withdraw  his 
beams,  she  was  to  cover  the  spring  with  a  stone,  on  which  sacred  and  mysterious  characters 
were  impressed.  One  night  this  was  forgotten  by  the  unhappy  Bera.  Overcome  with 
the  heat  and  chase  of  the  day,  she  was  seized  with  sleep  before  the  usual  hour  of  rest. 
The  confined  waters  of  the  mountain  burst  forth  into  the  plain  below,  and  covered  the 
large  expanse  now  known  by  the  name  of  the  lake  of  Awe.  The  third  morning  Bera 

VOL.  in.  N  awoke 


66  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

awoke  from  her  sleep.  She  went  to  remove  the  stone  from  the  spring ;  but  behold  ! 
no  stone  was  there:  she  looked  to  the  inheritance  of  her  tribe:  she  shrieked.  The 
mountain  shook  from  its  base ;  her  spirit  retired  to  the  ghosts  of  her  fathers  in  their 
light  airy  halls/' 

This  story  is  said  to  be  still  remembered  in  the  original,  and  sung  by  many  persons 
in  the  neighbourhood,  accompanied  by  many  subordinate  traditions  relative  to  Bera, 
related  in  the  ruder  style  of  the  peasantry.  It  was  said  that  her  abode  was  in  the  highest 
mountains ;  that  she  could  step  with  ease,  and  in  a  moment,  from  one  district  to  another; 
and  that,  when  offended,  she  caused  a  flood  to  issue  from  the  heights,  which  destroyed 
the  corn  and  inundated  the  fields.  This  fable  of  superstition  is  supposed  to  allude  to  the 
water-spouts,  which,  in  that  elevated  region,  often  burst  suddenly  on  the  hills,  tearing 
down  a  great  part  of  their  sides,  and  sweeping,  in  a  mingled  torrent  of  stones,  gravel, 
and  water,  into  the  plains  below.  In  an  age  of  ignorance  and  barbarism  these  tremendous 
effects  would  readily  be  attributed  to  supernatural  agency. 

The  following  statement  respecting  the  extent  of  Argyleshire  is  cited  from  the  Rev. 
Dr.  Smith's  agricultural  view  of  the  county  : 

1,213,500  acres  may  be  heath,  hill,  and  pasture. 
100,000  acres  arable. 
30,000  acres  wood. 

24,000  acres  fresh-water  lakes,  and  rivers. 

"  The  proportion  of  the  arable  lands,  here  stated,  is  nearly  as  one  to  twelve,  being  about 
a  thirteenth  of  the  whole.  To  an  eye  that  takes  in  but  a  superficial  view  of  the  face  of 
the  country,  this  proportion  of  arable  land  will  appear  too  great.  But  the  eye  is  very 
apt  to  be  deceived  in  judging  of  the  proportion  between  hills  and  plains.  To  make  a 
just  comparison  in  this  case,  one  must  form  the  idea  of  a  plain  extended  through  the 
base  of  a  hill,  and  compare  in  his  mind  the  extent  of  such  a  plain  with  that  which  he  has 
in  view.  The  surface  of  a  mountain  may  measure  many  times  the  extent  of  such  a 
horizontal  plain  as  it  stands  upon,  but  cannot  in  fact  contain  more  trees  or  piles  of  grass 
than  would  grow  on  such  a  plain,  if  indeed  so  many."  In  estimating  the  proportion 
above  stated,  it  is  also  to  be  considered  that  Kintyre,  which,  in  point  of  extent,  is  little 
more  than  one  tenth  of  the  county,  contains  29jOOO  acres,  computing  the  smaller  part 
which  has  not  been  surveyed  at  the  same  rate  with  that  which  was  actually  measured. 

Recurring  from  this  digression  to  a  continuation  of  the  journey  along  the  coast  of 
Mull,  the  next  feature  that  engages  attention  is  the  CASTLE  OF  AROS,  delineated  in  the 
annexed  view.  Its  site,  like  that  of  most  Hebridean  fortresses,  is  on  a  steep  rock  on  the 
sea-coast,  the  access  to  which,  by  land,  was  probably  in  ancient  times  defended  by  a 
moat  with  a  draw-bridge.  Under  the  rude  tactics  that  preceded  the  invention  of  fire- 
arms, such  a  position  would  be  deemed  sufficiently  strong  and  formidable  for  the  residence 
of  a  powerful  chieftain,  who  might  here  concentrate  a  force  adequate  to  the  various 

purposes 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  67 

purposes  of  excursive  warfare,  and  might  retire  to  this  secure  rallying  point  when  pressed 
by  superior  numbers.  Macdonald,  a  lord  of  the  isles,  is  said  to  have  been  the  founder  of 
this  castle ;  but  the  precise  date  of  its  erection,  and  the  period  during  which  he  held  it, 
have  not  been  ascertained.  As  its  name,  Aros,  in  Gaelic,  signifies  "  the  mansion  or  habita- 
tion," it  must  have  been  originally  recognized  as  the  residence  of  a  family  holding  great 
power  and  authority.  From  this  state  of  dignity  it  appears  to  have  long  ago  declined, 
for  its  characters,  even  as  a  ruin,  are  antiquated  and  time-worn. 

On  some  of  the  rising  grounds  which  bound  the  bay  of  Aros,  as  seen  in  the  view, 
there  are  patches  of  small  stunted  wood,  of  rather  an  elegant  character  than  otherwise, 
which  form  an  agreeable  contrast  with  the  naked  and  abrupt  eminence  crowned  by  the 
ruins  of  the  castle.     It  is  observable  that  the  rocky  sides  of  this  eminence  are  of  a  lighter 
colour  than  the  grey  stones  of  the  building  above,  which  are  apparently  of  a  different 
species,  and  may  have  been  preferred  as  being  more  applicable  to  architectural  purposes. 
Dr.  Jameson,  in  his  Mineralogical  Tour,  has  not  noticed  this  circumstance,  but  he 
remarks,  that  in  the  bed  of  the  rivulet  of  Aros,  which  comes  from  the  neighbouring 
basaltic  hills,  he  observed  numerous  blocks  of  granite,  similar  to  those  upon  the  hill  near 
Achnacraig.     "  These  blocks,"  he  adds,  "  seem  to  be  derived  from  a  basalt  tuff,  similar 
to  that  observed  near  Achnacraig ;  and  it  is  probable  that  such  a  rock  may  be  discovered 
in  the  neighbouring  hills.     It  will  he  an  object  worthy  the.  attention  of  future  travellers, 
to  ascertain  whether  this  (basalt  tuff?)  merely  covers  the  basalt,  as  has  been  observed  by 
Reuss  in  the  mountains  of  Bohemia,  or  alternates,  as  is  the  case  with  the  basalt  tuff  in 
the  isle  of  Canna,  and  in  other  parts  of  Scotland.     It  matters  not  in  which  of  these 
situations  it  be  found ;  it  is  still  to  be  considered  as  a  secondary  rock,  and  like  these, 
to  have  been  deposited  from  an  aqueous  fluid.     Probably  some  may  think  that  these 
masses  have  been  separated  from  the  decomposing  basalt  itself,  as  it  sometimes  contains 
pieces  of  granite.     This  however  is  an  appearance  so  rarely  to  be  observed  in  this  island, 
that  I  can  hardly  imagine  the  granite  blocks  to  be  derived  from  that  source/'     Professor 
St.  Fond  conceives  that  they  may  have  been  ejected  from  granite  quarries,  which  perhaps 
existed  at  great  depths  under  the  ancient  volcanoes,  by  the  explosions  which  took  place 
at  that  epoch,  when  extensive  combustions  wasted  this  region  and  formed  groups  of 
islands,  assignable  to  the  same  origin.     He  also  states  it  to  be  within  the  verge  of  possi- 
bility, that  those  parts  of  the  mountains  where  they  are  now  found,  were  not,  at  that 
period,  elevated  summits,  but  rather  formed  part  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  that  these 
granite  blocks  were  rolled  from  a  distance  by  the  currents.     He  considers  that  circum- 
stances of  subterraneous  explosion,  equally  terrible  with  those  which  formed  the  isle  of 
Santorini  in  the  Archipelago,  or  Montenove  in  Italy,  may  have  raised  up  the  bottom  of 
the  sea  in  volcanic  peaks ;  and  he  at  the  same  time  adverts  to  a  more  plausible  hypo- 
thesis, by  referring  to  a  period  when  mountains  still  higher  were  covered  by  the  sea,  a 

fact 


68  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

fact  demonstrated  by  the  existence  of  marine  bodies  in  beds  of  limestone  or  clay  on  the 
Alps  and  Apennines,  at  a  height  three  or  four  times  greater. 

The  epoch  contemplated  in  this  geological  speculation  is  anterior  to  all  human 
records,  of  which  the  earliest  represents  the  Hebrides  as  islands.  They  constituted  in 
very  remote  ages  a  separate  principality,  concerning  which,  as  it  came  to  be  vested  in 
the  founder  of  Aros  castle,  some  brief  historical  notices  may  here  be  admitted.  According 
to  the  account  published  by  Donald  Monro,  the  dean  of  the  Isles,  they  appear  to  have 
been  under  their  own  princes,  and  subject  to  the  Scottish  monarch  until  the  eighth 
century,  about  the  time  when  the  Pictish  kingdom  was  utterly  destroyed  by  Kenneth  the 
Second.  At  this  period  the  seat  of  the  Scottish  monarchy  was  removed  from  Campbel- 
town  and  Dunstaffnage  to  the  eastern  coast,  and  this  remote  and  deserted  region  soon 
became  a  prey  to  foreign  invaders,  the  Danes  and  Norwegians,  who  had  previously  made 
frequent  descents  on  the  islands,  and  now  obtained  firm  possession  of  the  greater  part  of 
them.  Thus  established,  they  extended  their  ravages  to  the  mainland,  and  subdued  the 
districts  of  Kintyre,  Ayrshire,  Knapdale,  and  part  of  Galloway.  About  the  end  of  the 
ninth  century,  Harold  Harfager,  king  of  Denmark  and  Norway,  made  an  expedition  to 
the  Scottish  isles,  over  which,  as  constituting  a  part  of  his  kingdom,  he  established  a 
viceroy,  for  their  future  government.  One  of  these  viceroys  abjured  his  allegiance  to 
the  sovereign,  declared  himself  king  of  the  Isles,  anrl  fived  the  seat  of  his  government  in 
that  of  Man,  where  he  and  his  successors  for  several  generations  were  sometimes  inde- 
pendent, and  sometimes  tributary,  according  to  the  vicissitudes  of  affairs.  Olaus,  one 
of  these  sovereigns,  in  the  twelfth  century,  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  Somerled, 
a  powerful  chieftain,  who  afterwards  declared  himself  an  independent  prince,  and 
separated  the  western  isles  and  Kintyre  from  the  kingdom  of  Man.  He  exercised  au- 
thority both  as  thane  of  Argyle  and  lord  of  the  Isles,  without  acknowledging  much 
subjection  to  the  throne  of  Scotland,  against  which  he  often  stood  in  hostility.  He  made 
various  incursions  upon  the  western  lowlands  during  the  reign  of  Malcolm  IV.,  and  seems 
to  have  made  peace  with  him  upon  the  terms  of  an  independent  prince  in  1157.  Seven 
years  afterwards  he  again  took  up  arms  against  Malcolm,  and  invaded  Scotland  with  a 
large,  but  probably  tumultuary  army,  collected  in  the  Isles,  in  the  mainland  of  Argyle- 
shire,  and  in  the  neighbouring  provinces  of  Ireland.  He  was  defeated  and  slain  in  an 
engagement  with  a  very  inferior  force  near  Renfrew,  and  his  son  Gillicolane  fell  in  the 
same  battle.  The  effects  of  this  disaster  were  long  felt  by  his  surviving  family,  who,  far 
from  being  competent  to  new  conquests,  were  hardly  able  to  defend  their  hereditary 
territories.  The  sovereignty  of  the  Isles  was  therefore  claimed  at  various  periods  by  the 
kings  of  Norway,  of  Scotland,  and  of  England,  though  the  descendants  of  Somerled  still 
kept  possession,  and  remained  tributary  to  Norway  until  1263,  when  the  battle  of  Largs 
turned  the  balance  of  power  in  favour  of  the  kings  of  Scotland.  In  the  fourteenth 

century 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  69 

century  the  descendants  of  Somerled  were  again  independent,  and  Donald,  grandson  of 
Angus  Og,  then  sovereign  of  the  Isles,  strengthened  his  power  by  the  acquisition  of  the 
earldom  of  Ross,  to  which  he  succeeded  by  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  Lesley,  earl  of 
Ross. 

The  descendants  of  Donald,  called  the  family  of  the  Macdonalds,  held  the  lordship 
of  the  Isles  for  many  years,  but  the  kings  of  Scotland,  in  proportion  as  their  authority 
became  strengthened  and  consolidated,  found  means  to  subdue  these  turbulent  chieftains. 
In  1493  James  the  Fourth  held  a  parliament  at  Kin  tyre,  where  he  emancipated  a  part  of 
the  mainland  vassals  of  the  Macdonalds ;  James  the  Fifth  made  a  voyage  among  the  Isles 
with  a  similar  view  of  diminishing  their  influence.  On  account  of  the  frequent  minorities 
that  occurred  in  the  succession  to  the  Scottish  crown,  and  of  the  consequent  weakness 
of  the  government,  the  only  expedient  for  some  time  practised  for  reducing  the  lords  of 
the  Isles,  was  to  alienate  some  of  their  possessions  by  conferring  them  on  neighbouring 
chieftains,  and  thus  involve  them  in  war.  After  the  happy  union  of  the  two  crowns,  they 
gradually  became  reconciled  to  the  condition  of  British  subjects,  but  they  long  retained 
that  lofty  spirit  which  distinguished  them  during  the  period  of  their  independence.  An 
anecdote  is  related  of  one  of  them,  who,  when  in  Ireland,  was  invited  to  an  entertainment 
given  by  the  lord  lieutenant.  He  happened  to  be  one  of  the  last  of  the  guests  who 
arrived,  and  took  the  first  vacant  seat  which  he  found,  and  which  was  near  the  bottom  of 
the  table,  by  the  door.  The  lord  lieutenant  invited  him  to  come  and  sit  by  his  side. 
Macdonald,  who  spoke  no  English,  asked,  "  What  says  the  carle  ?"  The  answer  was, 
"  His  lordship  bids  you  move  to  the  head  of  the,  table."  The  chieftain  replied,  "  Tell 
the  carle,  that  wherever  Macdonald  sits,  that  is  the  head  of  the  table."  As  a  proof  that 
"  even  in  their  ashes"  lived  the  wonted  fires  of  these  warriors,  it  is  stated  that  one  of  their 
tombs  at  Icolm  Kill  bears  the  following  laconic  inscription,  "  Macdonnil fato  hie"  seem- 
ing to  imply  that  fate  alone  could  lay  Macdonald  there.  The  generous  temper  of  these 
chieftains  was  consistent  with  the  princely  dignity  which  they  felt  it  incumbent  upon 
them  to  uphold.  A  night's  repose  or  a  single  repast  accorded  to  a  Macdonald  was  fre- 
quently rewarded  with  a  grant  of  land.  Many  families  in  the  islands  are  said  to  hold 
their  property  on  such  a  tenure,  and  the  titles  were  conferred  in  terms  characteristically 
brief  and  significant.  The  following  is  adduced  as  a  specimen,  divested  of  the  quaint 
rhyme  of  the  original :  "  I  Donald,  chief  of  the  Macdonalds,  give  here,  in  my  castle,  a 
right  to  Mac  Kay  of  Kilmahumag,  from  this  day  till  to-morrow,  and  so  on  for  ever,"  &c. 
The  monumental  records  of  such  men  as  these  suggest  emotions  somewhat  less  sadden- 
ing than  those  commonly  associated  with  the  memorials  of  decayed  grandeur ;  and  even 
the  ruins  of  their  Castle  of  Aros  may  be  viewed  with  a  respect  unallayed  with  melan- 
choly, when  we  consider  that  its  owners  were  men  that  disdained  to  indulge  in  melan- 
choly themselves,  and  would  have  despised  it  in  others. 

The  road  along  the  coast  northward  from  Aros  to  Tobermory  commands  a  succession 

of 


70  VOYAGE    HOUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

of  very  grand  mountain  scenery,  rendered  more  effective  by  contiguity  with  the  Sound  of 
Mull.     The  view  here  given,  entitled  TOBERMORY  ON  THE  SOUND  OF  MULL,  represents 
that  harbour  as  seen  on  the  approach  to  it  in  this  direction.    It  is  well  landlocked,  and  has 
a  fine  commodious  pier  of  masonry,  that  affords  good  shelter  for  boats.     The  scene  was, 
at  the  period  of  this  visit,  much  enlivened  by  the  presence  of  numerous  vessels  touching 
here  on  their  voyage  northward  to  engage  in  the  herring  fishery.     This  village  being 
peculiarly  well  situated  for  that  branch  of  trade,  attracted  the  notice  of  the  British  Society 
for  the  encouragement  of  Fisheries,  to  whose  exertions  it  is  in  a  great  degree  indebted 
for  its  present  prosperity  and  rising  importance.     It  possesses  a  fine  bay,  protected  from 
the  ocean  by  the  small  Isle  of  Calve,  and  it  lies  directly  in  the  track  of  shipping  which 
pass  from  the  western  parts  of  Britain  to  the  northern  countries  of  Europe.    It  has  also 
the  advantage  of  an  easy  navigable  communication  with  the  fishing  lochs  in  one  direction, 
and  with  the  Frith  of  Clyde,  as  well  as  with  Liverpool  and  many  considerable  ports  in 
the  other.     These  advantages  it  possesses,  according  to  the  opinion  of  many  persons,  in 
a  degree  superior  to  those  ascribed  to  the  port  of  Oban,  though  individuals  interested  in 
the  prosperity  of  that  establishment  will  naturally  be  inclined  to  call  this  superiority  in 
question.     The  society  above  mentioned  commenced  their  improvements  at  Tobermory 
in  1788:  a  custom-house  and  post-office  were  established  here  in  1791-      Since  that 
period  its  trade  has  been  progressive,  and  it  has  obtained  a  proportional  increase  of 
population.     Although  still  so  limited  in  extent  as  to  be  properly  termed  a  village,  it  is 
divided  into  an  upper  and  a  lower  town,  the  latter  of  which,  being  most  conveniently 
situated  for  commerce,  will  probably  thrive  the  most  rapidly,  and  reduce  the  other  to 
a  mere  suburb.     The  inhabitants  of  Tobermory,  whether  from  the  frequent  intercourse 
with  strangers  which  their  situation  occasions,  or  from  other  causes,  are  distinguished 
from  other  Hebrideans  by  a  greater  attention  to  personal  neatness  and  cleanliness. 
Their  reputation  for  these  qualities  was  spoken  of  at  various  places  in  the  course  of  the 
voyage;  and,  on  arriving  among  them,  it  proved  to  be  well  founded.    Another  agreeable 
prepossession  which  a  traveller  acquires  in  journeying  thither  arises  from  the  frequent 
praise  bestowed  on  the  beauty  of  its  females,  and  this  characteristic  also  is  well  warranted. 
There  are  certainly  many  pretty  women  at  Tobermory,  and  their  appearance,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  children  and  the  men,  is  much  improved,  by  that  glow  of  health  which 
habitual  cleanliness  never  fails  to  promote.     It  has  also  been  remarked,  and  with  truth, 
that  the  language  spoken  at  this  port  is  more  purely  English,  and  is  less  deformed  by 
provincialisms,  either  of  phraseology  or  of  accent,  than  at  many  other  remote  towns  in 
the  west  of  Scotland.    This  purity  of  idiom  may  have  been  generated  by  the  example  of 
some  of  the  first  settlers ;  but  it  has  no  doubt  been  maintained  and  extended  by  those 
frequent  communications  Avith  strangers  which  the  rising  commerce  of  the  place  has 
rendered  necessary.     These  are  all  very  gratifying  and  cheering  symptoms  of  the  future 
prosperity  of  this  little  colony,  and  afford  a  hope  that  their  influence  will  be  beneficially 

felt 


Tobermory,  on  the  Isle  of  Mull 


Mingarry  Castle,  Argylshire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  71 

felt  among  the  neighbouring  establishments  connected  with  it.  One  little  remark, 
however,  requires  to  be  made,  by  way  of  qualifying  this  commendation :  the  traveller 
who  visits  Tobermory  must  not  form  his  judgment  of  its  comforts  and  its  propretS  by  the 
style  of  accommodation  which  he  meets  with  at  the  principal  inn.  He  will  there  have 
to  tolerate  a  good  deal  of  negligence  on  the  part  of  the  attendants,  and  may  expect  to 
take  his  soup  with  a  horn  spoon  instead  of  a  silver  one.  The  interminable  series  of  petty 
inconveniences  to  which  this  belongs  may  be  left  to  the  imagination ;  it  seemed  fair  to 
hint  at  them,  because,  when  they  are  anticipated,  they  may  be  more  good-humouredly 
endured.  In  such  a  case,  to  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed. 

There  are  some  trees  on  the  slope  of  the  hills  near  Tobermory,  as  represented  in  the 
view ;  this,  perhaps,  is  the  wood  which  the  learned  tourist  mistook  for  heath.  The  pro- 
spect from  these  elevated  grounds  is  very  extensive ;  every  vessel  passing  up  or  down  the 
Sound  of  Mull  ma}'  here  be  observed.  The  mountains  seen  in  the  distance  are  those 
which  overlook  the  shores  of  Loch  Sunart.  The  bridge  represented  in  the  foreground 
traverses  a  little  rapid  mountain  stream  which  flows  into  the  bay  of  Tobermory.  The 
road  over  the  bridge  is  that  which  leads  from  Aros. 

On  leaving  this  harbour,  the  voyage  was  continued  across  the  Sound  to 

"  Where  Mingarry,  sternly  placed, 
O'erawes  the  woodland  and  the  waste." 

The  annexed  view  of  MINGARRY  CASTLE  represents  its  position  on  the  sea-coast  of 
Ardnamurchan,  which  is  such,  that  in  the  days  of  its  strength  it  must  have  commanded 
the  entrance  of  the  Sound  of  Mull,  as  well  as  that  of  Loch  Sunart.  The  ruins  have  not 
that  magnitude  which  we  usually  associate  with  the  idea  of  a  castle.  The  structure  is 
of  a  triangular  form,  with  the  corners  rounded  off;  and  a  house,  with  a  few  windows  in 
front,  occupies  nearly  its  whole  breadth.  It  is  now  the  property  of  Sir  James  Riddell. 
There  are  a  few  huts  in  its  vicinity.  The  irregular  form  of  the  castle  originated  in  the 
necessity  of  adapting  it  to  the  projecting  angles  of  the  rocky  eminence  on  which  it 
stands.  It  is  exhibited  in  the  present  drawing  as  beheld  by  a  spectator  looking  from  the 
north-west  down  the  Sound  of  Mull.  The  island  of  that  name,  and  its  lofty  mountain, 
Ben  Taillich,  are  visible  in  the  distance.  The  range  of  mountains  that  extend  up  the 
shores  of  Loch  Sunart  are  finely  broken,  and  have  a  very  picturesque  effect. 

The  account  given  of  this  castle  by  Mr.  Walter  Scott,  in  his  notes  to  "  The  Lord 
of  the  Isles,"  is  as  follows :  "  It  was  anciently  the  residence  of  the  Mac-Ians,  a  clan  of 
Mac-donalds,  descended  from  Ian  or  John,  a  grandson  of  Angus  Og,  Lord  of  the  Isles. 
The  last  time  that  Mingarry  was  of  military  importance,  occurs  in  the  celebrated  Leab- 
har-dearg,  or  Red  Book  of  Clanronald,  a  MS.  renowned  in  the  Ossianic  controversy. 
Allaster  Macdonald,  commonly  called  Colquitto,  who  commanded  the  Irish  auxiliaries 
sent  over  by  the  Earl  of  Antrim  during  the  great  civil  war  to  the  assistance  of  Mont- 
rose, 


72  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

rose,  began  his  enterprise  in  1644  by  taking  the  castles  of  Kinloch-Alline  and  Mingarry, 
the  last  of  which  made  considerable  resistance,  as  might,  from  the  strength  of  the  situa- 
tion, be  expected.  In  the  meanwhile  Allaster  Macdonald's  ships  which  had  brought  him 
over  were  attacked  in  Loch  Eisord,  in  Skye,  by  an  armament  sent  round  by  the  cove- 
nanting parliament,  and  his  own  vessel  was  taken.  This  circumstance  is  said  chiefly  to 
have  induced  him  to  continue  in  Scotland,  where  there  seemed  little  prospect  of  raising 
an  army  in  behalf  of  the  king.  He  had  no  sooner  moved  eastward  to  join  Montrose,  a 
junction  which  he  effected  in  the  braes  of  Athole,  than  the  Marquis  of  Argyle  besieged 
the  Castle  of  Mingarry,  but  without  success.  Among  other  warriors  and  chiefs  whom 
Argyle  summoned  to  his  castle  on  this  occasion  was  John  of  Moidart,  the  captain  of 
Clanronald.  Clanronald  appeared  ;  but,  far  from  yielding  effectual  assistance  to  Argyle, 
he  took  the  opportunity  of  being  in  arms,  to  lay  waste  the  district  of  Sunart,  then 
belonging  to  the  adherents  of  Argyle,  and  sent  part  of  the  spoil  to  relieve  the  castle  of 
Mingarry.  Thus  the  castle  was  maintained,  until  relieved  by  Allaster  Macdonald,  (Col- 
quitto,)  who  had  been  detached  for  the  purpose  by  Montrose."  These  particulars,  con- 
nected with  the  memorable  successes  of  Montrose,  are  stated  to  have  remained  hitherto 
unknown  to  Scottish  historians,  and  are  cited  from  the  relation  of  an  eye-witness. 

Loch  Sunart  is  the  northern  boundary  of  the  peninsula  of  Morvern,  so  frequently 
mentioned  in  the  celebrated  rhapsodies  attributed  to  Ossian.  The  imagery  that  per- 
vades these  effusions  accords  well  with  the  wild  and  romantic  scenery  of  the  regions  to 
which  they  relate.  The  clouded  sky,  the  misty  hill,  the  gloomy  wood,  the  storm-beaten 
rock,  and  the  raging  torrent,  are  objects  that  inspire  an  elevated  though  melancholy  train 
of  musing.  A  poet,  whose  genius  had  been  nurtured  and  expanded  among  such  scenes, 
would  almost  instinctively  imbibe  a  passion  for  the  mournful  sublime.  The  spot  which 
is  distinguished  as  the  birth-place  of  Ossian  may  be  termed  a  fit  cradle  for  such  a  bard ; 
it  is  the  deep  valley  of  Glencoe,  one  of  the  most  awful  and  gloomy  passes  of  the  High- 
lands. It  is  about  four  miles  long,  and  is  bounded  by  steep  and  rugged  mountains  of 
the  most  picturesque  form  and  hue,  among  which,  on  the  right,  is  Malmor,  and  on  the 
left  Con  Eion,  the  hill  of  Fingal.  The  stream  of  the  Coe,  which  flows  through  it,  is  the 
Cona  of  Ossian.  Among  various  allusions  to  it  in  his  poems,  the  following  has  been 
cited,  from  that  entitled  Fingal,  as  peculiarly  characteristic  of  this  rugged  scene :  "  Thus 
have  I  seen  on  Cona ;  (but  Cona  I  behold  no  more ;)  thus  have  I  seen  two  dark  hills 
removed  from  their  place  by  the  strength  of  the  bursting  stream ;  they  turn  from  side  to 
side,  and  their  tall  oaks  meet  one  another  on  high."  It  is  needless,  and  would  be  pre- 
sumptuous, in  this  place,  to  attempt  any  decision  of  the  controversy  respecting  the 
authenticity  of  these  poems.  If  Mr.  Macpherson  fabricated  them,  he  deserves  the  praise 
of  genius  bestowed  on  Ossian  in  this  country,  and  more  emphatically  on  the  continent. 
He  is  also  entitled  to  credit  for  as  great  a  share  of  ingenuity  as  that  displayed  by  Chat- 
terton  in  the  preparation  of  the  Rowleian  relics.  If  he  wrought  up  the  rude  materials 

preserved 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  73 

preserved  by  tradition,  and  connected  them  by  conjectural  emendations,  which  seems 
the  more  probable  supposition,  he  must  have  possessed  a  kindred  talent  for  Ossian's  style 
of  poetry,  and  the  consciousness  of  this  might  perhaps  have  urged  him  to  the  under- 
taking. He  might  have  been  enamoured  of  the  strain  of  lofty  and  impassioned  feeling 
which  he  discovered  in  these  venerable  fragments,  and  from  being  the  disciple  of  the 
bard,  he  might  aspire  to  be  his  imitator.  That  the  groundwork  of  these  poems  was 
really  ancient,  seems  a  conclusion  warranted  by  internal  evidence;  they  contain  bold 
and  familiar  allusions  to  a  very  primitive  state  of  society,  and  abound  with  descriptive 
passages,  which  represent  the  country  under  an  aspect  which  it  undoubtedly  possessed 
at  an  early  period,  but  which  has,  in  the  lapse  of  ages,  been  totally  changed.  The 
mountains,  rocks,  lakes,  and  bays,  may  be  supposed  to  remain  in  the  state  in  which  he 
has  described  them  ;  the  stream  of  Cona  still  winds  through  its  glen,  but  time  has  divested 
the  land  of  the  extensive  forests  which  once  clothed  it,  and  has  stripped  the  territory  of 
Fingal  of  its  shady  honours.  The  vestiges  of  these,  though  few,  are  sufficient  to  prove 
that  the  bard  did  not  indulge  in  the  licence  of  fiction  when  he  sung  of  the  wooded 
Morvern. 

In  voyaging  toward  the  Isle  of  Skye,  it  became  necessary  to  round  the  POINT  OF 
ARDNAMURCHAN,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given.  This,  in  the  mariner's  phrase,  is  a 
bluff  headland,  rocky,  sterile,  and  wind-worn.  In  many  places  the  rock  is  bared  of  the 
scanty  soil  which  covers  it,  by  the  violence  of  the  gales  on  this  exposed  promontory, 
against  which,  however  smooth  the  sea  in  other  parts,  a  heavy  surge  is  continually  beating. 
It  directly  faces  the  Atlantic,  and  is  the  most  westerly  point  on  the  mainland  of  Scot- 
land. It  is  nearly  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  Mull  of  Kintyre  on  the  south,  and 
Cape  Wrath  on  the  north,  which  is  the  north-west  point  of  Britain.  In  ancient  times 
Ardnamurchan  was  the  territorial  mark  which  divided  the  Hebrides  into  two  sovereignties, 
theNordereys,  and  the  Sudereys,  from  the  latter  of  which,  as  it  has  been  already  observed, 
an  English  prelate  deduces  his  episcopal  title  of  Sodor  annexed  to  that  of  Man. 

After  having  passed  this  headland,  an  extensive  prospect  opens,  which  is  bounded 
by  a  finely  composed  range  of  mountains,  much  varied  in  their  outline ;  part  of  them 
are  in  the  Isle  of  Skye,  but  the  most  picturesque  are  those  to  the  north-east,  which  are 
on  the  mainland :  they  are  all  exceedingly  bare  of  trees.  Among  this  wild  and  lonely 
scenery,  it  was  pleasing  to  trace  some  distant  indications  of  human  inhabitants,  by  the 
long  lines  of  smoke  that  arose  in  various  places  from  the  burning  of  kelp.  In  passing 
the  small  low  Island  of  Muck,  or  Mouach,  the  mountains  on  that  of  Rum  were  seen 
towering  considerably  above  it,  and  served  as  a  contrast  to  its  less  varied  though  more 
fertile  surface.  Mouach  is  understood  by  Celtic  etymologists  to  signify  Sow's  Island,  an 
appellation  which  Buchanan  has  justified  by  rendering  it  in  Latin,  Insula  Porcorum. 
Some  antiquaries  have  suggested  that  its  name  is  a  corruption  of  Monk,  adding,  that 
this  island  was  church  land  belonging  to  Icolumbkill,  and  that  an  ecclesiastic  from  that 

VOL.  in.  o  monastery 


74  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

monastery  used  to  reside  here.  It  is  between  two  and  three  miles  in  length,  and  one  in 
breadth.  Its  soil  is  reputed  to  be  good,  and  affords  pasturage  for  cattle,  which  attain  a 
considerable  size. 

Having  landed  on  the  Isle  of  Eigg,  about  six  in  the  evening,  the  first  object  was  to 
wait  upon  Mr.  M'Lean,  the  minister,  who  was  at  that  moment  absent,  but  the  ladies  of 
the  house  exercised  his  hospitality  in  the  politest  manner.  In  a  short  time  Mr.  M'Lean, 
having  returned,  offered  himself  as  guide  to  the  curiosities  of  the  place,  and  particularized 
two  remarkable  caverns,  which  we  visited.  They  have  been  described  by  Mr.  Walter 
Scott,  with  his  usual  accuracy,  in  a  note  to  the  Lord  of  the  Isles,  and  as  there  is  a  story 
of  fearful  interest  connected  with  one  of  them,  his  account  may  here  be  cited.  "  We 
had  rounded  more  than  half  the  island,  admiring  the  entrance  of  many  a  bold  natural 
cave,  which  its  rocks  exhibited,  without  finding  that  which  we  sought,  until  we  procured 
a  guide.  Nor,  indeed,  was  it  surprising  that  it  should  have  escaped  the  search  of  strangers, 
as  there  are  no  outward  indications  more  than  might  distinguish  the  entrance  of  a  fox- 
earth.  This  noted  cave  has  a  very  narrow  opening,  through  which  one  can  hardly 
creep  on  one's  knees  and  hands.  It  rises  steep  and  lofty  within,  and  runs  into  the 
bowels  of  the  rock,  to  the  depth  of  255  measured  feet ;  the  height  at  the  entrance  may 
be  about  three  feet,  but  rises  within  to  eighteen  or  twenty,  and  the  breadth  may  vary  in 
the  same  proportion.  The  rude  and  stony  bottom  of  this  cave  is  strewed  with  the  bones 
of  men,  women,  and  children,  the  sad  reliques  of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  island, 
200  in  number,  who  were  slain  on  the  following  occasion : — The  Macdonalds  of  the  Isle 
of  Eigg,  a  people  dependant  on  Clan-Ranald,  had  done  some  injury  to  the  laird  of 
Macleod.  The  tradition  of  the  isle  says,  that  it  was  by  a  personal  attack  on  the  chieftain, 
in  which  his  back  was  broken.  But  that  of  the  other  isles  bears,  more  probably,  that 
the  injury  was  offered  to  two  or  three  of  the  Macleods,  who,  landing  upon  Eigg,  and 
using  some  freedom  with  the  young  women,  were  seized  by  the  islanders,  bound  hand 
and  foot,  and  turned  adrift  in  a  boat,  which  the  winds  and  waves  safely  conducted  to 
Skye.  To  avenge  the  offence  given,  Macleod  sailed  with  such  a  body  of  men,  as  rendered 
resistance  hopeless.  The  natives,  fearing  his  vengeance,  concealed  themselves  in  this 
cavern,  and  after  a  strict  search,  the  Macleods  went  on  board  their  galleys,  after  doing 
what  mischief  they  could,  concluding  the  inhabitants  had  left  the  isle,  and  betaken 
themselves  to  the  Long  Island,  or  some  of  Clan-Ranald's  other  possessions.  But  next 
morning  they  espied  from  the  vessels  a  man  upon  the  island,  and  immediately  landing 
again,  they  traced  his  retreat  by  the  marks  of  his  footsteps,  a  light  snow  being  unhappily 
on  the  ground.  Macleod  then  surrounded  the  cavern,  summoned  the  subterranean 
garrison,  and  demanded  that  the  individuals  who  had  offended  him  should  be  delivered 
up  to  him.  This  was  peremptorily  refused.  The  chieftain  then  caused  his  people  to 
divert  the  course  of  a  rill  of  water,  which,  falling  over  the  entrance  of  the  cave,  would 
have  prevented  his  purposed  vengeance.  He  then  kindled  at  the  entrance  of  the  cavern 

a  huge 


Ardnamurchan  point,  Argylshire 


Scoor  Eig  on  the  Isle  of  Eig 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  75 

a  huge  fire,  composed  of  turf  and  fern,  and  maintained  it  with  unrelenting  assiduity,  until 
all  within  were  destroyed  by  suffocation.  The  date  of  this  dreadful  deed  must  have  been 
recent,  if  one  may  judge  from  the  fresh  appearance  of  those  reliques." 

The  mind  revolts  from  contemplating  the  act  of  vengeance  recorded  in  the  tradition 
above  cited.  When  the  refugees  peremptorily  refused  to  deliver  up  the  obnoxious  in- 
dividuals, it  might  have  been  supposed  that  a  chieftain  endowed  with  really  chivalrous 
feelings  would  have  abandoned  his  purpose  out  of  respect  for  such  magnanimity.  Or, 
if  his  rancour  remained  still  predominant,  surely  his  vassals  should  have  turned  away  in 
horror,  when  ordered  to  stifle  two  hundred  of  their  fellow-beings,  men,  women,  and 
children,  and  entomb  them  alive  in  their  asylum.  However  barbarous  the  provocation 
might  have  been,  the  retaliation  was  much  more  so.  There  is  a  meanness  in  it  also, 
which  appears  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  manly  valour  of  these  islanders.  But  in 
truth  the  valour  of  uncivilized  men  is  always  more  or  less  debased  by  cruelty,  and  there 
are  few  nations  whose  early  history  is  not  stained  with  acts  of  atrocity  similar  to  this. 
It  would  be  unjust  therefore  to  reproach  them  with  it  exclusively,  and  to  consider  it  a 
kind  of  alloy  inseparable  from  their  warlike  character.  Men  may  be  humanized  without 
being  rendered  less  brave ;  and  experience  has  shewn  that  the  right  of  force  may  be 
abolished  among  a  people,  not  only  without  disparagement,  but  even  to  the  exaltation 
of  their  hereditary  spirit.  The  honour  of  the  tartan  was  at  no  period  more  gallantly 
maintained,  in  the  estimation  both  of  friend  and  foe,  than  during  the  last  campaigns  on 
the  Continent. 

On  a  small  islet,  a  little  to  the  eastward  of  Eigg,  a  favourable  position  was  obtained 
for  delineating  its  most  striking  feature,  denominated  SCOOR  EIGG,  of  which  a  view  is 
here  given.  Though  extremely  rugged  in  appearance,  it  is  accessible  to  the  summit, 
which  commands  a  panoramic  survey  of  the  mainland  and  the  neighbouring  isles,  that 
may  truly  be  called  magnificent.  Dr.  Jameson,  who  calls  this  high  peak  a  promontory, 
observes,  that  the  whole  of  it  is  perfectly  mural,  extending  for  upward  of  a  mile  and  a 
half,  and  rising  to  the  height  of  several  hundred  feet.  It  is  entirely  columnar,  and  the 
columns  rise  in  successive  ranges  until  they  reach  the  summit,  where,  from  their  great 
height,  they  appear  diminutive.  They  are  disposed  in  different  directions,  being  either 
perpendicular,  curved,  or  horizontal.  Sometimes  the  horizontal  pillars  are  observed 
crossing  each  other,  the  sides  of  the  horizontal  columns  appearing  above  and  below  the 
ends  of  those  horizontal  columns  which  lie  in  a  contrary  direction.  They  vary  consider- 
ably in  the  number  of  their  sides,  having  three,  four,  five,  six,  and  seven  sides ;  but  he  did 
not  observe  any  of  them  jointed.  He  conjectured  at  first,  from  the  nature  of  the  strata  of 
which  the  island  is  composed,  that  these  columns  were  basalt,  but  a  nearer  examination 
showed  that  they  were  formed  of  a  species  of  porphyry,  with  a  basis  intermediate  between 
basalt  and  pitchstone.  The  same  kind  of  porphyry  seems  to  form  many  of  the  other 
hills  in  the  interior  of  the  island. 

The 


76  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

The  Isle  of  Eigg  is  about  four  or  five  miles  in  length,  and  from  two  to  three  in 
breadth.  Its  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from  a  small  hollow  or  valley  which  traverses 
it,  and  which  in  Gaelic  is  called  Eagg.  The  principal  part  is  hilly  or  rocky,  and  its 
vegetation  chiefly  heath  mixed  with  coarse  grass.  The  low  grounds  are  tolerably  fertile, 
and  are  made  to  produce  cabbage,  potatoes,  flax,  and  some  grain ;  but  the  crops  of  the 
latter  are  precarious,  on  account  of  the  prevalence  of  rainy  seasons.  The  Sound  which 
separates  Eigg  from  the  islet  of  Eillan  Chastel  on  the  south  affords  a  tolerable  harbour 
for  a  few  vessels,  not  exceeding  seventy  tons,  and  it  has  a  pier  for  fishing  boats. 

The  voyage  was  resumed  from  this  island  on  the  following  morning,  July  15th,  in  a 
boat  obtained  by  Mr.  M'Lean,  whose  hospitality  in  this  instance,  as  in  many  others, 
was  of  that  genuine  kind,  which,  without  enquiry,  anticipates  and  provides  for  the  wishes 
of  a  stranger,  and  which  seems  eager  to  spare  him  all  trouble,  even  the  grateful  one  of 
expressing  his  obligation.  In  passing  northward,  the  scene  was  much  enlivened  by  the 
presence  of  numerous  vessels  proceeding  in  that  direction  on  the  herring  fishery.  Some 
small  whales  were  occasionally  seen,  and  it  was  stated  that  their  appearance  among  these 
islands,  in  considerable  numbers,  was  by  no  means  uncommon.  After  a  progress  of  no 
great  duration,  another  characteristic  portion  of  Hebridean  scenery  presented  itself, 
•which  is  given  in  the  annexed  view,  entitled  PART  OF  THE  ISLE  OF  RUM.  In  the 
description  of  this  isle,  by  Monro,  archdean  of  the  isles,  it  is  denominated  Ronin,  a  name 
certainly  less  grotesque  than  that  which  it  commonly  bears,  and  therefore  judiciously 
preferred  by  the  poet,  who  thus  sketches  its  aspect  and  character,  while  describing  the 
voyage  of  the  Bruce. 

"  Merrily,  merrily,  bounds  the  bark, 

O'er  the  broad  ocean  driven, 
Her  path  by  Ronin's  mountains  dark 

The  steersman's  hand  hath  given. 
And  Ronin's  mountains  dark  have  sent 

Their  hunters  to  the  shore, 
And  each  his  ashen  bow  unbent 

And  gave  his  pastime  o'er, 
And  at  the  Island  Lord's  command 
For  hunting  spear  took  warrior's  brand." 

Monro  describes  the  isle  as  "  sixteen  myle  long  and  six  in  breadth  in  the  narrowest, 
one  forest  of  heigh  mountains,  and  abundance  of  little  deire  in  it."  The  mountains  are 
wild  and  rugged,  much  resembling  in  form  those  of  Arran.  The  nearer  mass  of  land 
seen  in  the  view  is  the  northern  termination  of  Eigg.  Later  travellers  state  the  extent 
of  Ronin,  or  Rum,  to  be  about  eight  miles  in  length,  and  nearly  the  same  in  breadth. 
The  woods,  which  formerly  afforded  shelter  for  the  deer,  and  covert  for  their  fawn 
from  the  eagles  and  other  birds  of  prey,  have  disappeared,  and  the  deer  are  nearly 
extirpated.  The  method  for  killing  them,  pursued  by  the  inhabitants  before  the  intro- 
duction 


Part  of  the  Isle  of  Rum 


Armidal,  the  Seat  of  Lord  Macdonald,  Isle  of  Skye 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  77 

duction  of  fire-arms,  is  stated  to  have  been  as  follows :  On  each  side  of  a  glen  stone 
dikes  were  begun,  pretty  high  in  the  mountains  on  each  side,  and  carried  on  to  the  lower 
ground  in  lines,  continually  approximating  until  they  terminated  within  two  or  three  feet 
of  each  other.  Here  a  circular  space  was  enclosed  by  a  stone  wall  of  sufficient  height  to 
confine  the  deer,  which  were  chased  from  a  distance,  driven  through  the  narrow  pass 
into  the  enclosure,  and  there  taken  and  destroyed.  The  vestiges  of  one  of  these  works 
are  still  traced  on  the  island. 

The  course  of  the  voyage  now  bore  upon  one  of  the  largest  and  most  distinguished 
of  the  Hebrides,  in  which  their  characteristic  scenery  appears  in  its  wildest  and  most 
striking  aspects.  The  Isle  of  Skye  is  stated  to  be  about  sixty  miles  long,  and  in  its 
greatest  breadth  nearly  forty  :  its  form  and  dimensions  are  very  irregular,  on  account  of 
the  many  locks  and  inlets  of  the  sea  by  which  the  coast  is  indented.  This  coast  is 
in  general  rocky,  and  in  many  places  the  cliffs  are  of  considerable  height.  The  most 
romantic  part  of  the  isle  is  on  the  south-west,  in  which  are  situated  the  lofty  and  rugged 
mountains  of  Cuchullin,  or  Coolin,  affording  many  scenes  of  naked  grandeur  and  sublime 
desolation.  Northward  of  these  mountains  is  a  succession  of  comparatively  low  hills, 
continuing  to  within  a  few  miles  of  the  coast  in  that  direction,  where  they  are  bounded 
by  a  plain,  forming  part  of  the  parish  of  Kilmuir.  The  district  to  the  south  of  this  rugged 
barrier  of  mountains  is  the  low  peninsula  of  Slate  or  Sleat,  which  is  considered  the  most 
fertile  part  of  the  island. 

Skye  is  identified  by  Camden  with  the  eastern  ^Ebudae  of  Ptolemy  :  other  antiqua- 
ries pronounce  it  to  be  the  Dumna.  Its  modern  name  is  deduced  from  the  Norwegian 
term  Ski,  signifying  mist ;  and  according  to  Dr.  Macpherson,  as  cited  by  Pennant,  it 
was  sometimes  called  Ealand-skianach,  or  the  cloudy  island,  a  suitable  epithet  to  a  region 
so  exposed  to  the  prevalent  westerly  winds  from  the  Atlantic,  charged  with  clouds  that 
frequently  overhang  and  obscure  the  summits  of  the  mountains. 

To  a  stranger,  prepossessed  with  an  idea  of  the  bleak  heights  and  frowning  cliffs 
of  this  island,  it  must  excite  an  agreeable  surprise  to  land  upon  it  at  the  spot  on  its  eastern 
coast,  represented  in  the  annexed  view,  entitled  ARMIDEL,  IN  SLATE.  It  is  the  property 
of  Lord  Macdonald,  and  is  considered  one  of  the  best  wooded  estates  in  Skye.  The 
extent  of  sylvan  ground  is  rather  limited,  and  the  trees  are  not  of  the  largest  growth, 
though,  in  relation  to  the  place,  they  are  considerable.  The  whole  scene  has  an  air  of 
pleasing  elegance,  totally  foreign  to  that  stern  and  rugged  aspect  which  the  mind  na- 
turally conceives  as  belonging  to  an  Hebridean  shore.  With  respect  to  the  mansion,  it  is 
necessary  to  apprize  the  reader  that  it  has  been  begun  by  the  present  proprietor,  after  a 
plan  of  Mr.  Gillespie,  and  that  the  erection  had  not  proceeded  farther  than  the  first  story 
at  the  period  here  alluded  to.  It  is  represented  in  the  view  as  finished  according  to  the 
design  of  the  architect;  and  this  pictorial  anachronism  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  regarded  as 
excusable,  when  it  is  considered  that  an  edifice  in  a  state  of  building  is  no  very  fit  subject 

VOL.  in.  p  for 


78  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

for  delineation,  and  that  the  present  view  of  one  of  the  pleasantest  scenes  in  Skye  will 
retain  the  advantage  of  novelty  when  the  mansion  which  adorns  it  has  been  completed. 
The  grounds  of  Armidel,  being  in  a  sheltered  situation,  and  watered  by  a  number  of 
streamlets,  abundantly  repay  the  attention  and  care  exercised  in  improving  them ;  the 
garden  in  particular  is  in  a  high  state  of  culture  and  luxuriance,  and  adds  greatly  to  the 
charms  of  this  marine  villa.  It  commands  to  the  eastward  a  prospect  bounded  by  the 
lofty  mountains  on  the  main  land,  and  including  a  great  extent  of  the  intervening  chan- 
nel, which,  in  the  fishing  season,  is  frequently  enlivened  by  the  presence  of  200  vessels  at 
a  time,  on  their  voyage  to  the  northward.  There  is  a  bay  at  Armidel,  formed  by  a  little 
peninsula,  which  affords  good  shelter  for  small  craft  navigating  the  channel.  An  admira- 
ble road  has  been  made  from  hence  to  Broadford,  011  the  north-east  coast  of  the  island. 

Proceeding  along  the  coast  for  about  four  miles,  another  subject  for  delineation  pre- 
sented itself,  in  the  harbour  of  ILORANSAY,  of  which  a  view  is  here  given,  including  a 
part  of  Loch  Hourn  on  the  mainland,  with  the  mountains  by  which  it  is  bounded.  The 
principal  trader  established  at  this  place  is  Mr.  Elder,  an  intelligent  and  enterprising 
man,  whose  civility  and  kindness  greatly  facilitated  the  object  of  this  visit.  Some  years 
ago  he  formed  here  a  small  establishment  for  the  supply  of  various  articles  to  the  mariners 
engaged  in  the  herring  fishery,  and  by  his  activity  and  industry  has  realised  a  handsome 
property.  The  harbour  is  secure  and  well  land-locked,  and  the  pier  by  which  it  has  been 
improved  probably  owes  its  construction  to  this  gentleman.  About  a  fortnight  after  the 
present  visit,  he  was  very  fortunate  in  a  fishing  expedition,  the  occasion  of  which  was 
rather  extraordinary  and  unexpected.  He  had  been  watching  the  passage  of  a  shoal  of 
herrings :  and,  on  observing  some  large  fins  projecting  above  water,  concluded  that  they 
were  pursued  by  a  multitude  of  whales,  which  proved  to  be  the  case.  These  he  imme- 
diately formed  the  design  of  capturing,  and  for  this  purpose  mustered  as  many  of  the  in- 
habitants as  could  render  him  assistance.  They  manned  the  boats,  and,  rowing  into  the 
channel,  succeeded  in  driving  the  shoal  of  whales  into  the  harbour.  The  object  was  to 
run  them  aground ;  and  it  was  known,  that  if  one  of  the  leading  whales  was  stranded, 
the  rest  of  them  might  be  expected  to  follow,  and  share  the  same  fate.  The  whales  being 
frightened  at  some  sloops  that  lay  at  anchor,  turned  about,  and,  eluding  the  boats,  got 
out  of  the  bay ;  they  were  overtaken  and  driven  in  again,  but  they  baffled  their  pursuers 
three  several  times :  the  chase  was  at  length  successful ;  one  of  the  headmost  rushed 
upon  the  beach,  and  the  shoal,  consisting  of  seventy-six  whales  of  various  sizes,  the 
largest  30  feet  in  length,  and  the  smallest  six  or  seven,  were  taken.  No  time  was  lost  in 
securing  the  blubber,  and  every  barrel  and  cask  that  the  village  could  supply  was  put  in 
requisition  on  the  occasion.  The  cargo  was  shipped  to  Liverpool  for  sale,  and  realised  to 
the  captors  a  considerable  sum.  It  seemed  not  irrelevant  to  a  delineation  of  this  har- 
bour, to  introduce  some  allusion  to  the  above-mentioned  occurrence,  by  indicating  the 
presence  of  a  shoal  of  whales,  as  usually  observed,  the  dorsal  fins  projecting  above  water. 

They 


Iloransay,  Isle  of  Skye 


Balmacarro-house,  Loch-alsh,  Ross-shire 


VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN.  79 

They  are  frequently  seen  in  considerable  numbers,  pursuing  the  herring-shoals,  in  these 
seas ;  but  it  will  probably  be  some  time  ere  another  rich  capture  takes  place  at  Iloransay. 

In  sailing  northward  up  the  channel  from  this  port,  the  eye  is  gratified  with  a  suc- 
cession of  very  fine  mountain-scenery,  which  assumes  a  variety  of  striking  aspects  as  the 
vessel  advances.  It  is  this  proximity  of  the  high  lands  to  the  seas  which  renders  a  voyage 
among  the  Hebrides  so  superior  in  interest  to  one  which  extends  along  a  level  unbroken 
line  of  coast;  it  gratifies  the  eye  with  a  continual  though  ever-changing  contrast,  and 
even  the  occasional  dangers  and  vicissitudes  of  such  a  precarious  navigation  tend  to 
heighten  the  enjoyment,  or  at  least  render  the  recollection  of  it  more  pleasing.  The 
mind  feels  a  solemn  pleasure  in  reverting  to  a  contemplation  of  the  grander  features  of 
nature,  which  have  been  beheld  while  struggling  with  currents  or  battling  with  winds ; 
but  to  muse  on  the  uniformity  of  a  tranquil  day's  sail,  that  has  afforded  no  cause  for  fear 
or  wonder,  is  about  as  drowsy  an  affair  as  to  ruminate  over  a  twelve  hours'  towage  in  a 
Dutch  trekschuyt.  Truth  requires  it  to  be  stated,  that  the  present  trip  from  Iloransay 
to  Loch  Alsh,  in  Ross-shire,  was  not  the  less  delightful  in  being  prosperous,  and  that  the 
apprehension  of  peril  was  a  sufficient  zest  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  prospect,  without  the 
peril  itself.  In  passing  Glenelg,  there  was  an  agreeable  view  of  the  estate  of  Crawford 
Bruce,  Esq.  who  possesses  very  extensive  property  in  this  district. 

After  landing  on  the  shore  of  Loch  Alsh,  the  annexed  view  was  taken,  entitled  BAL- 
MACARRO  HOUSE,  IN  ROSS-SHIRE.  It  is  the  residence  of  Hugh  Innes,  Esq.  M.  P.  who 
is  the  proprietor  of  the  extensive  domain  attached  to  it,  of  which  he  planted  very  consi- 
derable tracts  some  years  ago.  Many  of  the  trees  are  now  of  respectable  size,  and  the 
plantations  generally  are  in  a  flourishing  condition,  which  he  attributes  in  a  great  degree 
to  the  care  which  was  taken  to  prevent  the  cattle  from  browzing  on  and  injuring  the 
young  shoots.  If  the  same  precautions  were  used  on  all  grounds  appropriated  to  the 
growth  of  timber,  he  is  decidedly  of  opinion,  that  the  disappointments  and  failures  so  fre- 
quently complained  of  in  rearing  trees  would  in  a  great  measure  be  obviated.  The  remains 
of  forest-trees,  discoverable  in  various  parts  of  this  district,  afford  proof  that  the  soil  is,  or 
at  least  has  been,  propitious  to  their  growth ;  and  that  the  climate  has  no  hostile  influence, 
seems  evident  from  the  successful  experiments  which  he  has  himself  made ;  and  particu- 
larly from  the  flourishing  state  of  his  gardens,  which,  like  those  of  Armidel,  produce  in 
perfection  most  of  the  objects  of  British  horticulture.  These,  and  other  examples  which 
might  be  cited,  will  tend  to  remove  those  objections  against  planting  which  have  so  long 
existed  to  the  prejudice  of  the  country.  It  is  an  important  fact,  that  timber  thrives  most 
prosperously  on  these  coasts,  if  planted  on  good  soil ;  but  many  persons  plant  without 
consulting  the  nature  of  the  ground ;  and  when  there  happens  to  be  moss,  the  labour  of 
course  is  in  vain. 

The  roads  through  Loch  Alsh,  from  the  south  to  the  north,  are  excellent,  having 
been  chiefly  made  by  parliamentary  commissioners.  Other  lines  have  been  formed  to 

join 


80  VOYAGE    ROUND    GREAT    BRITAIN. 

join  these  parliamentary  roads ;  and  from  the  Skye  ferry  of  Kyle  Haken  in  Loch  Alsh, 
to  Inverness  by  Loch  Ness,  a  distance  of  above  seventy  miles,  there  is  one  of  the  "  best 
engineered"  and  best  made  roads  in  Scotland,  which,  when  good  inns  have  been  esta- 
blished upon  it,  will  open  to  the  traveller  a  novel  and  most  interesting  tour. 

The  Loch  herring-fishery  is  generally  carried  on  in  this  vicinity,  and  in  Loch  Duich, 
Loch  Carron,  the  opposite  sounds  in  Skye,  &c.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  cod  and  ling 
fishery  will  soon  be  begun  on  these  shores,  so  as  to  afford  employment  to  the  fishers  for 
herrings  when  the  shoals  leave  the  lochs.  On  the  shore  of  Skye,  opposite  to  Balmacarro, 
(a  sound  about  three  miles  in  breadth  intervening,)  is  the  anchorage  of  Cuillach,  which  is 
allowed  to  be  the  best  and  safest  on  the  western  coast.  There  is  an  excellent  parish 
church  at  Loch  Alsh,  built  by  Mr.  Innes,  where  service  is  performed  in  English  and 
Gaelic  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Downie.  The  population  of  this  parish  is  great ;  and  the  pro- 
posed augmentation  in  the  number  of  churches  and  of  clergy  in  the  Highlands  will  afford 
the  means  of  instruction  to  many,  who,  from  the  remoteness  of  their  residence,  are  unable 
to  attend  divine  service  at  the  parish  church.  The  fine  grazings  in  this  district  sustain 
very  good  black  cattle,  of  which  numbers  are  annually  sent  off.  Many  of  the  hills  are 
well  adapted  for  sheep,  either  of  the  old  country  breed,  called  black  faces,  or  the  south 
country  stock,  called  the  Cheviots. 

The  season  was  far  advanced  on  leaving  Balmacarro  for  Broadford,  in  Skye,  but  it 
still  afforded  time  to  visit  and  delineate  many  of  the  most  interesting  scenes  on  the  coasts 
of  that  island.  Those  subjects,  however,  must  be  reserved  for  the  commencement  of 
another  volume ;  to  prepare  for  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  devote  the  ensuing  summer 
to  a  prosecution  of  the  voyage  among  the  Hebrides,  and  round  the  northern  extremity  of 
Great  Britain.  As  this  most  arduous  part  of  the  undertaking  may  be  expected  to  present 
a  great  variety  of  striking  views,  it  will  of  course  occupy  a  considerable  interval  of  time. 
The  publication  of  the  fourth  volume,  it  is  hoped,  will  commence  toward  the  close  of 
autumn,  in  the  present  year. 


KND    OF    THE    THIRD    VOLUME. 


T.   DAVIJON,   LOMBARD-STREET,   WHITEFHIARJ,    LONDON. 

